Title: When Automata Meet Streams: Temporal Logic Compilation for Stream-Based Robotics Task and Motion Planning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.19453v1

Published Time: Fri, 21 Aug 2026 00:18:22 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# When Automata Meet Streams: Temporal Logic Compilation for Stream-Based Robotics Task and Motion Planning 

# Sayem Nazmuz Zaman, Cyrus Neary 

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering University of British Columbia Vancouver, BC, Canada 

Abstract 

Stream-based robotics Task and Motion Planning (TAMP) in-tegrates discrete symbolic planning with dynamically gener-ated continuous geometric parameters, such as poses, grasps, and trajectories. However, stream-based planners typically reason only about goal reachability, whereas long-horizon tasks also demand adherence to temporal specifications, such as safety-critical ordering, invariance, and liveness con-straints. No methods currently exist to enforce such tem-poral constraints for stream-based solvers because streams generate an expanding geometric object set via iterative stream refinement loops during planning, rendering exist-ing temporal-logic compilation techniques incompatible. We therefore present Synchronous Action Monitoring with Token Destruction (SAM-TD), a compilation method that enforces arbitrary Linear Temporal Logic over finite traces (LTL f )specifications in stream-based TAMP. SAM-TD translates ar-bitrary LTL f constraints into automata and embeds regressed automaton guards into action schemas, which are pre-specified before planning begins. By doing so, SAM-TD can handle objects generated by streams during planning, thus circum-venting the need to enumerate a fixed object set or modify the underlying planner. During search, SAM-TD synchronously updates automaton states and uses a validity token shared across all automata to prune constraint-violating branches. We show that SAM-TD supports dynamically generated stream objects from iterative stream refinements during plan search. Experimental results provide the first ever demonstration of stream-based TAMP under LTL f constraints in three robotics PDDLStream environments. Furthermore, on standard dis-crete PDDL benchmarks, SAM-TD is competitive with state-of-the-art temporal-constraint compilation methods. 

# 1 Introduction 

Robots deployed in homes, laboratories, and factories are ex-pected to complete long-horizon tasks while satisfying tem-poral requirements which are often safety-critical. A chem-istry robot (Yoshikawa et al. 2022; Darvish et al. 2024), for example, might have to turn on the fume cupboard before carrying out hazardous chemical reactions inside, a surveil-lance drone has to always ensure that it can return to a charg-ing station, and a Mars rover needs to eventually send data it collects to a central station during its task execution. A well-studied formal language for representing such tempo-ral specifications is Linear Temporal Logic over finite traces (LTL f ) (Pnueli 1977; De Giacomo and Vardi 2013). Solving such long-horizon robotics tasks also requires jointly reasoning about discrete, high-level actions and con-tinuous, low-level geometric quantities: the central concern of Task and Motion Planning (TAMP). Classical task plan-ners commonly represent the discrete component using the Planning Domain Definition Language (PDDL), where a planning problem is defined over a fixed and finite set of ob-jects. PDDLStream (Garrett, Lozano-Pérez, and Kaelbling 2020) extends PDDL-based planning to continuous domains using black-box generators, called streams , that produce geo-metric objects (such as grasps, placements, and trajectories) on-demand during plan search. In classical PDDL domains, LTL f specifications can be compiled into planning constructs (Baier and McIlraith 2006; Torres and Baier 2015; Camacho et al. 2017), allowing them to be enforced by unmodified planners. These compilation techniques, however, do not extend directly to stream-based TAMP problems (PDDLStream) because they assume the planning problem has a fixed and finite object set. By con-trast, streams dynamically generate and iteratively refine pre-viously unknown geometric objects during planning, result-ing in an expanding (and potentially infinite) object set. This creates a fundamental incompatibility between existing tem-poral constraint compilation techniques and stream-based TAMP. Pre-sampling a finite library of geometric objects does not provide an alternative, since the required objects may not be known in advance and are often plan dependent. Additionally, generating a sufficiently large library can be prohibitively expensive for both sampling and plan search. Consequently, there are no methods for enforcing arbitrary LTL f constraints in stream-based TAMP. In this work, we introduce Synchronous Action Moni-toring with Token Destruction (SAM-TD): a compilation framework that embeds LTL f constraint violation monitors directly into the high-level action specifications (lifted action schemas) of a stream-based TAMP problem. By compiling the monitoring logic into lifted action schemas, which are pre-specified before planning begins, SAM-TD can handle objects generated dynamically by streams during planning, thus circumventing the need to enumerate a fixed object uni-verse or modify the underlying planner. SAM-TD translates every LTL f constraint into a determin-istic finite automaton (DFA). Since the automaton guards describe the state produced after an action, SAM-TD re-arXiv:2608.19453v1 [cs.RO] 19 Aug 2026 Figure 1: Illustrative example with two LTL f constraints: φsafety keeps the white and red blocks out of the marked danger region (red wireframe), and φordering forbids moving the red block until the white block is placed. The planning problem requires the robot to move both of the blocks from the black tray to the green tray on the other side of the table. The unconstrained plan (red) is symbolically valid but carries the blocks straight through the danger region (red trace) and moves them in the incorrect sequence. With SAM-TD compiling both constraints into the PDDLStream task, an unmodified planner returns a plan (green) whose sampled trajectory routes around the region (green trace) while respecting the ordering. gresses each guard through the action’s effects to obtain an equivalent condition on the state and the action parameters 

before the action’s execution. Conditional effects added to the action then update the corresponding automaton state syn-chronously with the original action. To monitor violations, SAM-TD introduces a validity token, Valid , carried by ev-ery feasible plan. The token is initially present, required as part of the goal, and can never be added by any action. If an action drives any DFA into a sink state, the action’s condi-tional effect permanently deletes Valid (Token Destruction). The violating action therefore remains applicable, but ex-ecuting it makes the goal unreachable, allowing standard delete-relaxation heuristics to prune the resulting dead end. Constraints that have not been violated must additionally terminate in accepting automaton states. We summarize our contributions as follows: (1) We intro-duce the first compilation technique to embed arbitrary LTL f

constraints into stream-based TAMP problems, guaranteeing that any plan returned by a stream-based TAMP solver sat-isfies all specified LTL f constraints. (2) We show that the Token Destruction mechanism can be viewed as a two-state monitor automaton over DFA sink transitions. (3) We provide the first empirical evaluation of LTL f -constrained stream-based TAMP problems and identify key bottlenecks in doing so. (4) We show that our stream-based TAMP compilation technique is backward-compatible with, and competitive on classical PDDL benchmarks. 

# 2 Background and Related Works 

2.1 LTL f and Deterministic Finite Automata 

LTL f (De Giacomo and Vardi 2013), the finite-trace version of LTL (Pnueli 1977), extends propositional logic over a set of atoms AP with the operators next (X) and until (U): 

φ ::= p | ¬ φ | φ1 ∧ φ2 | Xφ | φ1 U φ2, p ∈ AP, 

with eventually Fφ ≡ true U φ, always Gφ ≡ ¬ F¬φ, re-lease R, and weak next WX . The truth values for the formulas are evaluated over finite traces σ = s0 · · · sn, with n ≥ 0.Every LTL f formula φ can be translated into a Deterministic Finite Automaton (DFA) 

Dφ = ⟨Q, 2AP , q 0, δ, F ⟩

that accepts exactly the traces satisfying φ (De Giacomo and Vardi 2013). Here, Q is a finite set of states, AP is the set of atomic propositions, 2AP is the input alphabet of their possible truth assignments, q0 ∈ Q is the initial state, 

δ : Q × 2AP → Q is the transition function, and F ⊆ Q is the set of accepting states. The DFA acts as a monitor for φ, where reading the trace in sequence transitions the automaton through its states, and the trace satisfies φ if and only if its run ends in an accepting state. A trace that transitions the DFA into a sink state, a non-accepting state from which no accepting state is reach-able, violates φ. The LTL f to DFA construction is doubly exponential in |φ| in the worst case (De Giacomo and Vardi 2013). In this work, a temporal specification is a finite constraint set, C = {φ1, . . . , φ m} of LTL f formulas. We abbreviate the DFA of φj as Dj . A plan π (a sequence of symbolic actions) satisfies C if and only if every Dj accepts the trace 

τ (π) that π induces. 

2.2 Classical Planning 

A lifted classical planning task is a tuple ⟨P, O, A, I, G ⟩

with predicate symbols P, object set O, action schemas 

A, initial state I, and goal condition G (McDermott et al. 1998). Substituting objects for the parameters of an atom or schema is called grounding ; an atom or action with no re-maining parameters is ground . Ground (P, O) denotes the set of all ground atoms, and a state s ⊆ Ground (P, O) is the set of ground atoms currently true. Each action schema 

a = ⟨params( a), pre( a), eff +(a), eff −(a)⟩ has a precondi-tion and add/delete effects over its parameters and may carry conditional effects (c ▷ e), which apply e only when c holds in the state where the action executes. Executing an applica-ble ground action a in state s yields the successor γ(s, a ).A plan π = a1, . . . , a n is applicable in I if it induces the 

state sequence (trace) τ (π) = s0s1 · · · sn, with s0 = I and 

si = γ(si−1, a i); π solves the task iff sn |= G. Reading each si as the truth assignment it induces over AP turns this state sequence into the trace τ (π), the object over which our temporal constraints are evaluated. 2.3 Action Regression via Weakest Preconditions 

Action Regression is the predicate-transformer (Dijkstra 1976) view of action execution: given an action a and a post-condition ψ, which is a propositional formula over ground atoms, the weakest precondition regression Reg a(ψ) gives us the least restrictive condition on the action’s pre-state that guarantees ψ holds after executing a (Rintanen 2008). Re-gression is classically used for backward search and invariant synthesis (Rintanen 2008), and more recently for trajectory-constraint compilation (Bonassi et al. 2021; Mantenoglou et al. 2026). We use it for the same purpose in the stream-based setting (§ 3.3): the transition conditions of the DFA refer to the state after an action, and regression turns each of them into an equivalent check on the state before the action, so that the planner can decide whether to apply the action. 

2.4 Stream-based Task and Motion Planning 

Stream-based TAMP (Garrett, Lozano-Pérez, and Kael-bling 2020; Garrett et al. 2021) extends classical plan-ning tasks with continuous geometric reasoning over robot configurations, poses, grasps, and trajectories us-ing streams : declaratively specified black-box generators 

s = ⟨inp( s), dom( s), out( s), cert( s)⟩ that consume ob-jects satisfying the domain facts dom( s) (e.g., a pose and a grasp) and dynamically generate new geometric objects (e.g., an inverse-kinematics solution) together with stream-certified facts cert( s) declaring what the outputs satisfy (e.g., Kin (b, q, p, g )). Algorithms such as PDDLStream’s 

Adaptive algorithm (Garrett, Lozano-Pérez, and Kaelbling 2020) alternate between (i) an optimistic search phase, which plans over a finite PDDL abstraction containing placeholder objects for not-yet-sampled stream outputs, and (ii) a plan refinement phase, which calls samplers along candidate plan skeletons to bind the placeholders, feeding failures back into search. As we shall see later on, this plan–sample–refine loop creates three requirements for any stream-supportive temporal-constraint compilation method. Although classical TAMP solvers can compile the lifted PDDL task into a grounded representation before search be-gins ( eager grounding), stream-based TAMP solvers cannot: the object set grows during planning as streams produce values. Stream-based solvers therefore replace the classi-cal planner’s translator with their own instantiation layer, which grounds an action only once its precondition pred-icates are ground and its geometric parameters are either pre-specified or streamed. As a consequence of this stream-specific grounding requirement and the plan–sample–refine loop inherent to most stream-based solvers, any stream-supportive temporal constraint compilation method must sat-isfy all the following requirements: 

• Schema-level, stream-compatible encoding: The com-pilation must operate on lifted action schemas rather than ground operators, since the object set is unknown before planning. Any schema modification must remain sound as streams introduce new objects, and must respect the in-stantiation layer’s semantics (parameter–constant match-ing, unbound action parameters, no equality checks; see supplementary material). 

• Preservation of the domain-action skeleton: One orig-inal domain action must correspond to one monitored trace step and no synchronization or bookkeeping actions may be inserted as these can break the plan–sample–refine loop. 

• Sampling-aware pruning: Expanding a symbolic ac-tion during search may trigger costly geometric sampling. A useful encoding must therefore let the planner avoid searching constraint-violating branches. SAM-TD (§ 3) satisfies all these requirements by construc-tion. Further discussion is in the supplementary material. 

2.5 Related Works 

Classical temporal-goal compilations commonly augment a planning task with automaton state. Baier and McIlraith (2006) compile LTL f goals into Non-deterministic Finite Automata (NFA), and update the reachable NFA states via ac-tion conditional effects defined over ground atoms. Edelkamp (2006), Torres and Baier (2015), and Camacho et al. (2017) each track different types of automatons through dedicated 

synchronization-update actions interleaved between domain actions, breaking PDDLStream’s plan–sample–refine loop. De Giacomo, Favorito, and Fuggitti (2022) compile Pure-Past LTL (ppLTL) by tracking selected past-subformula val-ues through derived predicates and effects which are de-fined over ground atoms as in Baier and McIlraith (2006). TCORE (Bonassi et al. 2021) compiles PDDL3 trajectory constraints via regression, but only over fully grounded tasks. Its lifted successors LiftedTCORE and LCC (Man-tenoglou et al. 2026) avoid grounding, but LiftedTCORE regression matches action parameters to constraint objects through equality checks, breaking stream-specific semantics while LCC adds bookkeeping actions. In summary, existing temporal constraint compilations generate artifacts that make them incompatible for stream-based TAMP. Addressing this incompatibility is the primary focus of our work. 

# 3 Methodology 

3.1 Problem Formulation 

We build on the PDDLStream formalism (Garrett, Lozano-Pérez, and Kaelbling 2020). A PDDLStream problem is a tuple Π = ⟨P, O, A, I, G, S⟩ , with the same formulation as a classical planning problem (§ 2.2) extended with a set of streams, S (§ 2.4). Streams recursively extend I with certified facts over generated objects, yielding the (possibly infinite) optimistic closure I∗. A binding θ maps every parameter of an action schema a ∈ A to an object and thus we use a(θ)

to denote the resulting ground action. A solution is a finite ground action sequence π = ⟨a1(θ1), . . . , a n(θn)⟩ whose pre-image is contained in I∗ and whose final state satisfies 

G. We write s0

> a1

−→ s1

> a2

−→ · · · an

−−→ sn for the induced state sequence, with s0 = I. Temporal constraints are stated over the discrete part of the state ( task-level ) and never about the stream-certified facts ( motion-level ). Each state si induces a propositional valuation L(si) = {p ∈ AP | p ∈ si} which is the set of monitored atoms that are true in si. If π induces Figure 2: SAM-TD pipeline. Left: Inputs are an unmodified PDDLStream problem Π and DFA monitors for each LTL f

constraint. Inside SAM-TD: (1) Each transition guard gkℓ j constrains the post-action state, γ(s, a ) ⊨ gkℓ j , and is regressed through every lifted action schema into the equivalent pre-action condition: s ⊨ Reg a(gkℓ j ) (§ 3.3). (2) The regressed transitions are added to action schemas as conditional effects that advance the monitor in lockstep with the action (§ 3.4) during plan search. (3) Transitions into a sink delete a Valid token: the compiled state of a two-state violation monitor tracking all DFAs at once (§ 3.5). The compiled goal requires the Valid token and all DFAs in accepting states. Right: The compiled problem Π′

is solved by an unmodified planner with hFF . Since no action re-adds Valid , any state that loses it sets hFF = ∞, so violating branches (red) are pruned before geometric sampling is spent on them. The returned plan π satisfies all constraints. the state sequence s0, . . . , s n, its temporal trace is 

τ (π) = L(s0)L(s1) · · · L(sn).

Definition 1 (LTL f -constrained PDDLStream problem) . An LTL f -constrained PDDLStream problem is a pair (Π , C ),where Π is a PDDLStream problem and C = {φ1, . . . , φ m}

is a finite set of m LTL f formulas over AP . Let 

π = ⟨a1(θ1), . . . , a n(θn)⟩

be a finite sequence of ground actions, and let 

s0

> a1(θ1)

−−−−→ s1

> a2(θ2)

−−−−→ · · · an(θn)

−−−−→ sn

be the state sequence induced by executing π in Π. The task-level trace induced by π is the finite word 

τΠ(π) = L(s0)L(s1) · · · L(sn) ∈ (2 AP )n+1 .

Then the plan π is a solution of (Π , C ) if and only if 1. π is a solution of Π; and 2. τΠ(π) |= φj for every j ∈ { 1, . . . , m }.Our objective, therefore, is a compilation : (Π , C ) 7 → Π′

whose solutions are exactly the solutions of (Π , C ) and whose execution traces preserve the one-domain-action-to-one-trace-transition correspondence above. In particular, the compilation must not insert trace-visible monitoring actions between consecutive domain actions, since doing so would change the semantics of step-sensitive LTL f formulas such as X (next ) and also break the plan-sample-refine loop. Additionally, because compilation alters only the PDDL domain and problem, any PDDLStream planning algorithm (e.g., Incremental, Focused, Binding, Adaptive) can be used to solve the compiled problem Π′.Fig. 2 (Inside SAM-TD) summarizes the three main ideas of our compilation. SAM-TD regresses successor state guards, updates every monitor inside the original domain ac-tion, and makes a constraint violation permanently visible to the planner by deleting Valid .

3.2 From LTL f Constraints to Automata 

Following § 2.1, we translate each LTL f constraint φj into its DFA, Dj = ⟨Qj , 2AP j , q 0 

> j

, δ j , F j ⟩ using LTLf2DFA and MONA (Henriksen et al. 1995; Fuggitti 2019). We write qkj

for states of Dj , with q0 

> j

as the initial state. MONA returns each automaton in symbolic form where DFA transitions are grouped by guarded edges. For each pair qkj , q ℓj ∈ Qj , the guard gkℓ j is a Boolean formula over AP j such that 

δj (qkj , σ ) = qℓj ⇐⇒ σ |= gkℓ j

where δj is the DFA transition function and σ ∈ 2AP j is a truth assignment to AP j , serving as the input symbol that ei-ther satisfies or falsifies the guard formula. The guarded tran-sition set is Tj = {(qkj , g kℓ j , q ℓj ) | qkj , q ℓj ∈ Qj , g kℓ j̸ ≡ ⊥} .

Because Dj is deterministic and total, the guards on edges leaving any fixed state q are mutually exclusive and jointly exhaustive; they partition the alphabet 2AP j , so at each time-step exactly one outgoing edge fires. If some finite prefix of a trace has no continuation that can satisfy φj , the DFA collapses all such prefixes into a single non-accepting state from which no accepting state is reachable. We write q⊥ 

> j

for this rejecting sink state; a run that enters q⊥ 

> j

has irrecoverably violated the constraint. Each transition (qkj , g kℓ j , q ℓj ) ∈ T j is classified by its target: 

type( qkj , g kℓ j , q ℓj ) = 



self qkj = qℓj

sink qℓj = q⊥ 

> j

,

forward otherwise. Before any domain action executes, the monitor must ob-serve the initial planning state. We therefore set qstart  

> j

=

δj (q0 

> j

, L (s0)) during compilation, since by Definition 1, the trace begins with L(s0) and the automaton must read this first letter before it begins monitoring actions. If qstart  

> j

= q⊥ 

> j

, the initial state alone already violates φj and the compiled prob-lem must be unsolvable. Our compilation reproduces exactly this semantics: Valid is then initially false and can never be added, so the compiled goal is unreachable (§ 3.4). 

3.3 Lifted Action Regression 

A DFA guard is evaluated in the successor state; however, the planner must decide before executing an action which transition that action will cause. We accordingly translate every guard into an equivalent condition on the pre-action state, separately for each action schema. For a ground action, regression is well defined (Rintanen 2008): Let a(θ) be an applicable ground action and g be some DFA guard over 

AP j for DFA Dj :

s |= Reg a(θ)(g) ⇐⇒ γ(s, a (θ)) |= g

Reg a(θ)(g) is a Boolean formula, and its atoms are drawn from AP j . Recall, however, that our compilation must op-erate on lifted action schemas to allow streams to introduce geometric objects during planning. The main complication is that a DFA guard can mention a named object (e.g., 

moved (blue )), whereas the lifted action effect mentions a 

parameter (e.g., moved (? b)). So lifted regression must rea-son about an object’s identity rather than the object itself. For every named object o mentioned in a DFA guard, we intro-duce a static identity predicate Is -o(·), with the single initial fact Is -o(o). With the identity atoms in place, Reg a(g) is a Boolean formula over the guard’s atoms in AP together with identity atoms over params( a), computed once per schema. We formally write lifted action regression as follows: 

s |= Reg a(g)[ θ] ⇐⇒ γ(s, a (θ)) |= g

where Reg a(·)[ θ] replaces each parameter by its object under the binding θ.

Regression of a ground atom Let a be an action schema and let p(¯ o) = p(o1, . . . , o k) be a ground guard atom. For an action argument t and object o, define 

Eq( t, o ) = 



Is -o(t) if t is a parameter ,

⊤ if t = o, 

⊥ otherwise. The add- and delete-match conditions for p(¯ o) are 

Add p(¯ o) 

> a

= _ 

> p(¯ t)∈eff +(a)
> k

^

> ℓ=1

Eq( tℓ, o ℓ),

Del p(¯ o) 

> a

= _ 

> p(¯ t)∈eff −(a)
> k

^

> ℓ=1

Eq( tℓ, o ℓ).

Algorithm 1: SAM-TD( Π, C )

Require: Π = ⟨P, O, A, I, G, S⟩ , C = {φ1, . . . , φ m}

Ensure: Π′ = ⟨P′, O, A′, I ′, G ′, S⟩ 

1: A′ ← copy (A); P′ ← P

2: for j = 1 , . . . , m do 

3: Dj ← LTL f 2DFA (φj )

4: qstart  

> j

← δj (q0 

> j

, L (I)) 

5: add M kj to P′ for every qkj ∈ Qj

6: add Is -o to P′ for all o ∈ Obj( φj )

7: end for 

8: add Valid to P′

9: for all a ∈ A ′ do 

10: for all j and (qkj , g, q ℓj ) ∈ T j with qkj̸ = qℓj do 

11: r ← Reg a(g)

12: if qℓj = q⊥ 

> j

then 

13: Add (M kj ∧ r) ▷ (¬Valid ) to a

14: else 

15: Add (M kj ∧ r) ▷ (¬M kj ∧ M ℓj ) to a

16: end if 

17: end for 

18: end for 

19: I′ ← I ∪ { M start  

> j

| j = 1 , . . . , m } ∪ { Is -o(o) | o ∈ Obj( C)}

20: if qstart 

> j

̸ = q⊥ 

> j

for every j then 

21: I′ ← I′ ∪ { Valid }

22: end if 

23: G′ ← G ∧ V 

> j

Acc j ∧ Valid 

24: return ⟨P′, O, A′, I ′, G ′, S⟩ 

Then the regression of p(¯ o) through a is 

Reg a(p(¯ o)) = Add p(¯ o) 

> a

∨



p(¯ o) ∧ ¬ Del p(¯ o)

> a



We present the unconditional case; effects that are themselves conditional regress analogously (Rintanen 2008). Intuitively, 

Reg a(p(¯ o)) states that the atom holds after a iff a makes it true, or it already held and a does not delete it. Regression is applied compositionally: a compound guard is regressed by regressing its atoms and reassembling the results with the same Boolean structure (Rintanen 2008). 

3.4 SAM-TD Compilation 

Monitor state and initialization. For every qkj ∈ Qj ,SAM-TD introduces a fluent M kj , meaning that monitor j

currently occupies state qkj . If qstart  

> j

= qkj , then M kj is ini-tially true. Exactly one such fluent is initialized for each monitor. SAM-TD then adds all required static identity facts 

Is -o(o). The shared fluent Valid is initially true if and only if no monitor starts in its sink state. 

Action-synchronous monitor updates. For each action schema a and each non-self DFA edge (qkj , g kℓ j , q ℓj ) with 

qℓj̸ = q⊥ 

> j

, SAM-TD adds the conditional effect 

 M kj ∧ Reg a(gkℓ j ) ▷  ¬M kj ∧ M ℓj

.

For each transition into a sink state q⊥ 

> j

, SAM-TD deletes the 

Valid token (Token Destruction Mechanism) 

 M kj ∧ Reg a(gk⊥ 

> j

) ▷ ¬Valid .Figure 3: SAM-TD median end-to-end (left) and median compilation (center) time in stream-based TAMP under adversarial and arbitrary constraint scaling (Experiment 1 and Experiment 2). Runtime breakdown (right) shows per-component medians as stacked areas. Fast Downward translation, not the SAM-TD compilation itself, dominates cost of end-to-end compilation and planning. No action adds Valid . We augment the planning goal G as follows: 

Acc j = _ 

> qkj∈Fj

M kj , G′ = G ∧ Valid ∧

> m

^

> j=1

Acc j .

The original streams are copied unchanged. The full SAM-TD compilation is shown in Algorithm 1. 

3.5 Validity Monitor and Heuristic Pruning 

The fluent Valid is the planning representation of a two-state monitor VC with states vok and vbad 

VC = {vok , v bad }, δ V , v start ,

as shown in Fig. 2 (Token Destruction Mechanism). δV moves 

vok to vbad exactly when any Dj takes a sink transition; vbad 

is absorbing, and vstart = vok if and only if no monitor starts in its sink state. The PDDL fluent Valid denotes vok . Token Destruction exposes constraint violation to heuristics such as 

hFF . Since no action can add Valid , under delete-relaxation heuristics this positive goal fluent is unachievable from any state in which it has been deleted, so hFF assigns such states infinite cost. In the PDDLStream search architecture, this al-lows the symbolic branch to be discarded before it is selected for geometric object sampling. 

# 4 Experiments 

4.1 PDDLStream Experiment Setup 

We use three PDDLStream environments: Kitchen from (Garrett, Lozano-Pérez, and Kaelbling 2020), Tabletop Ma-nipulation derived from (Wu et al. 2025), and our own 

ZoneSort environment. Each environment has a task-specific LTL f constraint set (see Appendix F). We use the PDDL-Stream Adaptive algorithm (Garrett, Lozano-Pérez, and Kaelbling 2020) as the solver for the compiled planning problem. We replay all solver-returned plans to verify ex-ecutability, achievement of the original goal, and constraint satisfaction. 

Experiment 1: Arbitrary LTL f constraint scaling We compile five different orderings of task-specific constraint sets (Appendix F), one constraint at a time. At any fixed number of constraints k, different orderings enforce different subsets of the task-specific constraint set. 

Experiment 2: Adversarial Constraint Scaling We com-pile adversarial LTL f constraints which are designed to re-ject by an unconstrained plan and force re-planning with each added LTL f constraint. Details on the adversarial constraint design are in the supplementary material. 

Experiment 3: (Ablation) Compiling without the Token Destruction Mechanism A natural variant of SAM-TD in-stead blocks violations at the precondition: for each regressed sink-transition guard, the negated guard is conjoined into the action’s precondition, so that any constraint-violating instan-tiation becomes inapplicable. We call this variant SAM-PB (precondition blocking). The supplementary formalizes pre-condition blocking. We carry out Experiment 2 with SAM-PB using identical LTL f formulas, solver, planning budgets, and memory limits and compare its behavior with SAM-TD. 

4.2 Classical PDDL Setup 

Since no prior compilation technique supports streams, we compare SAM-TD against existing methods on six published PDDL3 tasks (Gerevini et al. 2009), two each from Open-stacks, Rovers, and Storage, enforcing the first k trajectory constraints at five different levels per task, and up to k = 128 

on Storage, with a 180-second compile-plus-search budget, a 3 GiB memory limit, and lama-first heuristic planner. We evaluate SAM-TD against BM06 (Baier and McIlraith 2006), TB15 (Torres and Baier 2015), TCORE (Bonassi et al. 2021), LiftedTCORE and LCC (Mantenoglou et al. 2026), and Plan4Past (De Giacomo, Favorito, and Fuggitti 2022). 

4.3 Results and Discussion 

Temporal constraint compilation is linear in the number of constraints and action schemas We separate the cost of constructing the DFAs from the cost of compiling them into the planning task. Given the DFAs, SAM-TD introduces at most |A| Pmj=1 |T j | transition constructs, where |A| is the number of lifted action schemas and Tj is the set of transitions of the jth DFA. For a fixed domain and bounded-size DFAs and guards, the compilation is therefore linear in the number of constraints m. The measurements agree (Fig. 3): median compilation time grows linearly at roughly 30 to 80 milliseconds per added constraint. Additionally, Fig. 3’s runtime breakdown shows that the compilation layer is never the bottleneck with increasing constraints. Figure 4: Encoding ablation on the Experiment 2 prefixes: median planning time for SAM-TD and SAM-PB, with time-outs capped at the per-environment budget (dashed). Capped points are right-censored. The ZoneSort SAM-PB arm has one accepted repeat; it exhausts memory at k=15 before any Fast Downward invocation, and later prefixes were not run (shaded). 

Grounding incurs the highest cost Fig. 3 shows the two constraint scaling experiment results. For both experiments, the main cost for compilation and planning comes from grounding the action schema into action operators (FD trans-late). The PDDLStream Adaptive algorithm alternates be-tween planning over an optimistic abstraction, where place-holder objects are used for geometric objects which have not yet been sampled, and calling geometric samplers to real-ize the resulting plan skeleton. When sampling cannot sat-isfy the skeleton plan’s geometric requirements, the failure is recorded and a new skeleton is planned which invokes a new FD translate. Since every added constraint enlarges the task, the grounding cost incurred during every skeleton plan generation also increases. The price of search and sampling, however, remains flat since we prune violating branches be-fore expending geometric sampling on them. 

Precondition blocking leads to ground action operator explosion Fig. 4 shows the ablation experiment (Experi-ment 3) between SAM-TD and SAM-PB. SAM-PB exhausts the planning budget for small k across Kitchen and Table-top, and exhausts the pre-allocated memory budget (3 GiB) 

before planning even begins for ZoneSort. The exponential ground operator blowup for precondition blocking arises be-cause precondition blocking yields a logical conjunction of disjunctions that DNF-normalizing translators such as Fast Downward compile into one operator copy per combina-tion of disjuncts, yielding up to dm ground copies, where d

bounds the number of disjuncts in each negated guard. This ablation shows the value of the Token Destruction mecha-nism which allows violations to live in conditional effects that ground linearly and are pruned by hFF 

Competitive scaling on published PDDL3 constraints 

Although SAM-TD is designed for stream-based TAMP, its compilation remains competitive when streams are ab-sent. Table 1 compares the seven methods on the 30 task-constraint-level instances. SAM-TD, BM06, TCORE, and Plan4Past solve all 30 instances of the planning problem. On                                        

> max constraints k
> Compiler Solved Openst. (24/29) Rovers (30/56) Storage (128/128) t∩(s)
> SAM-TD (ours) 30/30 24/29 30/56 128/128 1.88
> BM06 30/30 24/29 30/56 128/128 2.71 TB15 15/30 4/4 4/8 4/64 9.55 TCORE 30/30 24/29 30/56 128/128 2.16 LiftedTCORE 22/30 24/29 30/56 1/1 6.77 LCC 22/30 24/29 30/56 1/1 1.15
> Plan4Past 30/30 24/29 30/56 128/128 2.47

Table 1: Published PDDL3 scaling over six tasks and five lev-els of constraint prefixes per task. Domain entries report the max verified k for the two tasks in order: Openstacks p61/p75, Rovers p60/p90, and Storage p19/p24. t∩ is the geometric-mean compiler-plus-planner time on the instances solved by all seven methods. Complete outcomes, pairwise runtimes, and representation sizes are in supplementary material. the 11 instances solved by every method, SAM-TD acheives the second lowest geometric-mean total time. Thus, our re-sults indicate that stream compatibility does not prevent com-petitive performance on classical PDDL. 

# 5 Summary and Future Work 

We present Synchronous Action Monitoring with Token De-struction (SAM-TD), the first compilation method for enforc-ing arbitrary Linear Temporal Logic over finite traces (LTL f )constraints in stream-based robotics Task and Motion Plan-ning. SAM-TD translates each LTL f constraint into a Deter-ministic Finite Automaton (DFA), and encodes the automa-ton’s transitions as conditional effects on the action schemas, synchronously advancing the DFA state inside the compiled task. Any action that violates a temporal constraint deletes a single shared validity token, so violating branches are pruned by standard delete-relaxation heuristics. Our experiments provide the first demonstration of LTL f -constrained stream-based TAMP. Compilation time grows linearly with the num-ber of constraints (for bounded-size DFAs and guards). The ablation shows that the Token-Destruction mechanism keeps action grounding tractable. This work shows that tempo-ral constraints in stream-based TAMP can be enforced by compilation alone, with end-to-end cost governed by the planner’s own grounding rather than by search, geometric sampling, or the compilation logic. For future work, we plan to extend SAM-TD to mobile and multi-robot TAMP, and to bi-level planners that combine reinforcement-learning skills and samplers with heuristic task-level search, which SAM-TD constrains directly. References 

Baier, J. A.; and McIlraith, S. A. 2006. Planning with Tem-porally Extended Goals Using Heuristic Search. In Proceed-ings of the Sixteenth International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS) .Bonassi, L.; Gerevini, A. E.; Percassi, F.; and Scala, E. 2021. On Planning with Qualitative State-Trajectory Constraints in PDDL3 by Compiling them Away. In Proceedings of the Thirty-First International Conference on Automated Plan-ning and Scheduling (ICAPS) , volume 31, 46–50. Camacho, A.; Triantafillou, E.; Muise, C.; Baier, J.; and McIl-raith, S. 2017. Non-Deterministic Planning with Temporally Extended Goals: LTL over Finite and Infinite Traces. In Pro-ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 31. Darvish, K.; Skreta, M.; Zhao, Y.; Yoshikawa, N.; Som, S.; Bogdanovic, M.; Cao, Y.; Hao, H.; Xu, H.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.; Garg, A.; and Shkurti, F. 2024. ORGANA: A Robotic As-sistant for Automated Chemistry Experimentation and Char-acterization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.06949 .De Giacomo, G.; Favorito, M.; and Fuggitti, F. 2022. Plan-ning for Temporally Extended Goals in Pure-Past Linear Temporal Logic: A Polynomial Reduction to Standard Plan-ning. arXiv .De Giacomo, G.; and Vardi, M. Y. 2013. Linear Temporal Logic and Linear Dynamic Logic on Finite Traces. In Pro-ceedings of the Twenty-Third International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI) , 854–860. Dijkstra, E. W. 1976. A Discipline of Programming . Engle-wood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall. ISBN 978-0132158718. Edelkamp, S. 2006. On the Compilation of Plan Constraints and Preferences. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS 2006) , 374–377. Ambleside, UK: AAAI Press. Fuggitti, F. 2019. LTLf2DFA. Garrett, C. R.; Chitnis, R.; Holladay, R.; Kim, B.; Silver, T.; Kaelbling, L. P.; and Lozano-Pérez, T. 2021. Integrated Task and Motion Planning. Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems , 4: 265–293. Garrett, C. R.; Lozano-Pérez, T.; and Kaelbling, L. P. 2020. PDDLStream: Integrating Symbolic Planners and Blackbox Samplers via Optimistic Adaptive Planning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS) , volume 30, 440–448. Gerevini, A. E.; Haslum, P.; Long, D.; Saetti, A.; and Di-mopoulos, Y. 2009. Deterministic Planning in the Fifth In-ternational Planning Competition: PDDL3 and Experimental Evaluation of the Planners. Artificial Intelligence , 173(5–6): 619–668. Henriksen, J. G.; Jensen, O. J.; Jørgensen, M. E.; Klarlund, N.; Paige, R.; Rauhe, T.; and Sandholm, A. B. 1995. MONA: Monadic Second-Order Logic in Practice. BRICS Report Series , 2. Hoffmann, J.; and Nebel, B. 2001. The FF Planning System: Fast Plan Generation Through Heuristic Search. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 14: 253–302. Mantenoglou, P.; Bonassi, L.; Scala, E.; and Zuidberg Dos Martires, P. 2026. Two Constraint Compilation Methods for Lifted Planning. In Proceedings of the Fortieth AAAI Con-ference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-26) , 36325–36333. McDermott, D.; Ghallab, M.; Howe, A.; Knoblock, C.; Ram, A.; Veloso, M.; Weld, D.; and Wilkins, D. 1998. PDDL – The Planning Domain Definition Language – Version 1.2. Tech-nical Report CVC TR-98-003/DCS TR-1165, Yale Center for Computational Vision and Control, Yale University. Pnueli, A. 1977. The Temporal Logic of Programs. In 18th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (SFCS 1977) , 46–57. IEEE Computer Society. Rintanen, J. 2008. Regression for Classical and Nondeter-ministic Planning. In Proceedings of the 18th European Conference on Artificial Intelligence (ECAI) , volume 178, 568–572. IOS Press. Torres, J.; and Baier, J. A. 2015. Polynomial-Time Reformu-lations of LTL Temporally Extended Goals into Final-State Goals. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI) , 1696– 1703. Wu, Y.; Xiong, Z.; Hu, Y.; Iyengar, S. S.; Jiang, N.; Bera, A.; Tan, L.; and Jagannathan, S. 2025. SELP: Generating Safe and Efficient Task Plans for Robot Agents with Large Language Models. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) .Yoshikawa, N.; Li, A. Z.; Darvish, K.; Zhao, Y.; Xu, H.; Kuramshin, A.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.; Garg, A.; and Shkurti, F. 2022. Chemistry Lab Automation via Constrained Task and Motion Planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09672 .A Why Classical Temporal Compilations Are Incompatible with Stream-Based Instantiation 

Classical planners can ground eagerly: a translator enumer-ates the closed, typed object set and emits every ground operator before search begins. Stream-based solvers cannot, since the object set grows as streams produce values, so PDDLStream replaces the translator with its own instantia-tion layer (§2.4 of the main paper). The replacement changes which PDDL constructs a compilation may rely on. This sec-tion describes those semantics at the level a compilation sees them and traces how each classical compilation artifact falls outside them. 

Fact-driven instantiation. Rather than enumerating a uni-verse, the instantiation layer lets facts drive grounding. A binding θ for a schema a is assembled by matching the static atoms of pre( a) against the optimistic fact set I∗; both initial static facts and stream-certified facts qualify, the latter be-cause a certified fact, once generated, is never deleted. Writ-ing pre stat (a) for these atoms and vars(¯ t) for the parameters occurring in the argument tuple ¯t, the layer instantiates a

only when every parameter has such a source of candidate objects: 

params( a) ⊆ [  

> p(¯ t)∈pre stat (a)

vars(¯ t). (1) A geometric parameter is therefore bound exactly when some certified atom mentions it: Kin( b, q, p, g ) in a precondition supplies candidates for the pose, grasp, and configuration as streams produce them, which is what allows optimistic place-holders for not-yet-sampled objects to participate in ground-ing at all (Garrett, Lozano-Pérez, and Kaelbling 2020). Flu-ent preconditions play no part in binding and are checked during search. Conditional-effect conditions likewise pass through instantiation untouched and are evaluated as ordi-nary state lookups by the search engine. This asymmetry, binding-time preconditions against search-time effect condi-tions, decides where a compilation may and may not place its monitoring logic. 

What falls outside the fragment. Three constructs that classical compilations lean on have no place in this discipline, and they are exactly the three named in §2.4. 1. R1: Equality check is not supported. An atom (= x, o ) is certified by no fact, so it can neither generate nor filter a binding, and the layer provides no equality test. 2. R2: Parameter–constant matching cannot be written di-rectly. An atom that names an object, moved (blue ) rather than moved (? b), binds nothing under Eq. (1); empirically, schemas whose preconditions carry such atoms fail to in-stantiate in the reference implementation. 3. R3: No action parameter may be left unbound. A new variable introduced by a compilation, appearing in no static atom of the host schema, violates Eq. (1) and blocks instantiation of the entire schema. 4. R4: Negated sink fluents not accepted by the goal. Goals are conjunctions of positive conditions, so a negated sink fluent cannot be required at the end of the plan. 

Where classical compilations collide. Each classical ar-tifact meets one of these walls. Compilations in the style of Baier and McIlraith (2006) and De Giacomo, Favorito, and Fuggitti (2022) write monitor updates as conditional ef-fects over ground atoms; the atoms themselves would survive instantiation, but the surrounding pipeline does not ( R2 ). Relating the named object to the acting parameter instead requires the equality test the fragment lacks, the construct on which LiftedTCORE’s regression depends (Mantenoglou et al. 2026) ( R1 ). Grounding the task up front, as TCORE does (Bonassi et al. 2021), presupposes the closed object universe that streams remove. Moving monitor updates into dedicated synchronization actions (Torres and Baier 2015; Camacho et al. 2017), or bookkeeping actions as in LCC (Mantenoglou et al. 2026), avoids all three constructs but violates the second requirement of §2.4 instead: the inserted actions have no stream support, add trace steps that change the semantics of step-sensitive operators, and break the plan– sample–refine loop. In our development, every repair of one construct landed on another. 

# B Discussion of SAM-TD’s Formal Properties 

The main paper makes two claims that this section discusses in more detail. First, §2.4 states that SAM-TD satisfies the three stream-specific requirements by construction. Second, §3.1 asks for a compilation whose solutions are exactly the solutions of (Π , C ). Rather than developing formal theo-rems and proofs, we walk through the constructions of §3 and Algorithm 1 of the main paper and point out, for each claim, the structural facts of the compilation that it rests on. The regression step specializes the standard correctness ar-gument for action regression (Rintanen 2008), and the mon-itor bookkeeping follows the usual automata-product pattern of temporal-goal compilations (Baier and McIlraith 2006). What is specific to SAM-TD, and what this discussion there-fore focuses on, is how these components interact with the static identity predicates, the shared Valid token, and an object universe that streams keep extending during search. 

Scope. Throughout, we rely on conditions that are implicit in the main paper. Constraints are stated over ground task-level atoms: each AP j is finite, every object named in a formula is known when SAM-TD runs, and stream-certified predicates never occur in AP , so extending a state with stream-certified facts never changes its trace letter. Note that this does not require stream outputs to be known at compi-lation time. Poses, grasps, and trajectories may still enter as action arguments after compilation; only the constants writ-ten in the formulas themselves must exist beforehand. Orig-inal actions are deterministic, all compilation symbols ( M kj ,

Is -o, Valid ) are fresh, and conditional effects follow stan-dard PDDL semantics: conditions are read in the pre-action state and all selected effects apply simultaneously. Finally, each DFA merges all states from which no accepting state is reachable into the single sink q⊥ 

> j

. Merging them preserves the accepted language, since none of them can reach an ac-cepting state anyway, and the merged state is absorbing: a transition leaving it would make an accepting state reachable after all. The compiled monitors track the DFA runs. Three ob-servations chain together. First, the identity predicates behave like equality. Is -o receives the single initial fact Is -o(o) and is then never added or deleted by any action or certified by any stream, so in every reachable state Is -o(x) holds exactly when x = o. This remains true for objects that streams intro-duce later, since no stream certifies the fresh predicate. The static atoms therefore implement the parameter–constant test that the instantiation layer forbids us ( R1 , R2 ) from writ-ing as an equality literal. Second, with the identity atoms in place, regression is exact in every reachable compiled state: 

s |= Reg a(g)[ θ] holds exactly when γ(s, a (θ)) |= g for every applicable ground instance a(θ). The atomic case is the fa-miliar reading of §3.3, the atom holds after the action exactly when the action adds it or it already held and is not deleted, and compound guards follow because regression distributes over the Boolean connectives (Rintanen 2008). Third, each action selects exactly one outgoing edge per monitor. The guards leaving any DFA state partition the alphabet 2AP j

(§3.2), regression transfers that partition to the pre-action state, and the conjoined M kj switches off every edge whose source state the monitor does not occupy. A self-loop emits no effect, a forward edge deletes its source fluent and adds its target, and a sink edge deletes the token. Putting these together yields the invariant behind the whole method. Write s′ 

> i

for the compiled state after the first i

domain actions and ρj,i for the state of Dj after reading 

L(s0) · · · L(si), so that ρj, 0 = qstart  

> j

. Along every executable prefix, 

Valid ∈ s′ 

> i

⇐⇒ ρj,i ̸ = q⊥ 

> j

for all j, (2) 

Valid ∈ s′ 

> i

=⇒  M kj ∈ s′ 

> i

⇔ qkj = ρj,i 

 for all j, k. (3) A sink edge deletes only Valid , so after a violation the mon-itor fluent may lag its run. This is harmless: the token is already gone, no action re-adds it, and by absorption the run stays in q⊥ 

> j

, so both sides of Eq. (2) remain false forever. 

Exactness of the compilation. Correctness now reads di-rectly off the compiled goal G′ = G ∧ Valid ∧ V 

> j

Acc j .A plan reaching G′ satisfies the original goal, since injected effects touch only fresh fluents, and has kept the token, so by Eq. (2) no run entered a sink and by Eq. (3) its monitors are current and sit in accepting states; by DFA correctness (De Giacomo and Vardi 2013) its trace satisfies every φj .Conversely, a plan whose trace every Dj accepts can never visit the absorbing, non-accepting sink, so its token survives and its monitors end in Fj . The same action sequence there-fore executes in Π′ and reaches G′: preconditions and original effects are untouched, and the injected effects cannot conflict because at most one non-self edge fires per monitor. Solu-tions of Π′ are therefore exactly the solutions of (Π , C ), the empty plan included: it is accepted precisely when I satisfies 

G and every qstart  

> j

is accepting. And because the streams and their sampling assumptions are untouched, any PDDLStream algorithm that is sound and (probabilistically) complete on the compiled fragment keeps that guarantee for (Π , C ). One subtlety deserves emphasis: Token Destruction only catches irrecoverable prefixes. A liveness obligation such as Fp can remain recoverable through the entire trace and still be un-met when the plan stops. That failure mode never touches the token and is caught, exactly once, by the Acc j conjunct in the goal. 

Schema-level, stream-compatible encoding. Algo-rithm 1 copies each schema and appends conditional effects; it adds no parameter, no precondition, no action cost, no stream, and no equality literal. Every variable inside an injected condition is already a parameter of the host schema, since it can only enter through one of that schema’s effects during regression, so no condition mentions an unbound variable that the instantiation layer would have to resolve. Consequently, a binding grounds the compiled schema exactly when it grounds the original one, and the stream-certified facts a fixed plan needs are identical before and after compilation: SAM-TD neither consumes nor pro-duces stream objects. The compilation also commutes with grounding. Over any finite object universe Ω, grounding the compiled schemas and then evaluating each ground identity atom Is -o(x) to its truth value, true exactly for x = o, yields the same conditions that ground regression would produce on the grounding of Π over Ω. Because this holds for every finite Ω, it holds in particular for the optimistic universe of each PDDLStream iteration (Garrett, Lozano-Pérez, and Kaelbling 2020): when streams extend the universe, the already-compiled schemas ground correctly over the new objects, and the identity tests evaluate correctly on them, to false unless the new object is the named one, which streams never produce. Thus, the encoding is stream-compatible without enumerating an object set. 

Preservation of the domain-action skeleton. SAM-TD introduces no executable action. The map from original to compiled ground actions is the identity on name and binding, so a solution has the same actions in the same order, with the same length and cost, and the projected task-level trace con-tributes exactly one letter per domain action after the initial one. Step-sensitive operators such as X are therefore evalu-ated at the same trace positions before and after compilation, and the skeleton handed to the refinement phase is the one the domain author wrote: no synchronization actions need to be inserted during search or stripped from returned plans. 

Sampling-aware pruning. On reachable compiled states, losing the token is synonymous with violation by Eq. (2). Such a state is a genuine dead end, since Valid is a goal con-junct and no action re-adds it. It is also a delete-relaxation dead end: relaxation drops delete effects but never introduces facts absent from the state, so Valid appears in no layer of the relaxed planning graph and hFF returns ∞ (Hoffmann and Nebel 2001). An hFF -guided search may therefore discard every post-violation state without losing a single constrained solution. In the plan–sample–refine loop, this discarding hap-pens inside symbolic task-level search, before it can complete into a skeleton, so the refinement phase is never asked to bind geometric placeholders for a branch already known to violate a constraint. 

Compilation size. Our compilation introduces one moni-tor predicate per DFA state, one identity predicate and initial fact per object in Obj( C), one Valid fluent, and at most 

|A| Pmj=1 |T j | injected conditional effects. For a fixed do-main and bounded-size DFAs and guards, the compilation is therefore linear in m, matching the measurements in §4.3. This bound only accounts for SAM-TD’s compilation and does not take into account a downstream translator’s nor-malization or grounding strategy, which §4.3 measures sep-arately. 

# C SAM-PB: Precondition Blocking 

SAM-PB is the encoding ablation of Experiment 3 (§4.1 of the main paper). It shares its entire front end with SAM-TD: the same DFAs and pre-evaluated start states (§3.2), the same identity predicates and lifted regression (§3.3), and the same forward-edge conditional effects that advance each monitor fluent M kj in synchronization with the action (§3.4). The two compilation methods differ only in sink transition encoding. SAM-PB conjoins the negated regressed guard into the host action’s precondition. For each action schema a and each sink transition (qkj , g k⊥ 

> j

, q ⊥ 

> j

) ∈ T j ,

pre( a) ← pre( a) ∧ ¬  M kj ∧ Reg a(gk⊥ 

> j

). (4) By the exactness of regression (§3.3), the added conjunct is false in precisely those states where executing a would drive 

Dj into its sink, so every violating instantiation becomes inapplicable, where SAM-TD would leave it applicable but make the goal unreachable. With sink transitions unreachable, the Valid token has nothing to record and is dropped: SAM-PB sets I′ =

I ∪ { M start  

> j

| j = 1 , . . . , m } ∪ { Is -o(o) | o ∈ Obj( C)} and 

G′ = G ∧ Vmj=1 Acc j . If some qstart  

> j

= q⊥ 

> j

, the compiled problem is unsolvable. The two encodings accept exactly the same plans. A solution of either compiled problem never takes a sink transition, in SAM-PB because Eq. (4) forbids it and in SAM-TD because the deleted Valid token makes the goal unreachable, and the discussion of §B otherwise carries over unchanged. The ablation therefore isolates a purely rep-resentational choice: the same regressed guard, placed in a precondition versus a conditional effect. That placement is what Experiment 3 measures. 

Reg a(gk⊥ 

> j

) is in general a disjunction of conjunctive cases, so its negation in Eq. (4) is a conjunction of disjunctions, and the precondition accumulates one such block per sink edge across all m constraints. DNF-normalizing translators such as Fast Downward multiply these blocks out, one op-erator copy per combination of disjuncts, yielding up to dm

ground copies where d bounds the number of disjuncts in each negated guard. SAM-TD carries the identical guard in-side a conditional effect, which grounds once per edge; this difference alone accounts for the operator explosion reported in §4.3. 

# D Adversarial Constraint Design 

This appendix details the construction behind Experiment 2 (§4.1 of the main paper). For each environment, we first solve the unconstrained problem and independently verify the re-turned plan; this reference plan fixes an ordered sequence of task-level events (placement and manipulation milestones such as placed (·) and moved (·)). The adversarial catalog is then enumerated deterministically from that sequence. For every ordered pair of reference events, ea occurring before 

eb, we add the ordering reversal (¬ ea) U eb, which forbids 

ea until eb has occurred; afterwards, we append every cata-logued safety invariant G(¬f ) whose atom f the reference trace makes true. Each retained formula is independently checked, by running its DFA on the reference trace, to reject the common reference plan, and a single independently veri-fied witness plan that satisfies the full catalog proves that ev-ery nested prefix remains feasible. The scaling runs then en-force the literal prefixes {φ1, . . . , φ k} for k = 0 , . . . , K max ,with three repeats per depth. Adversarial thus has a precise, limited meaning in our experiments: every formula rejects the common unconstrained reference plan, so the unconstrained solution never survives compilation; it need not reject the constrained plan found at depth k − 1.

# E Classical PDDL3 Scaling Curves 

Fig. 5 complements Table 1 of the main paper with the full scaling curves behind its coverage counts. The bottom row shows that the aggregate outcomes are structured. SAM-TD, BM06, TCORE, and Plan4Past complete all 30 task-constraint cells with totals that grow gently in k; TB15 is right-censored earliest in all three domains; and LiftedT-CORE and LCC finish Openstacks and Rovers but exhaust the 3 GiB memory budget immediately beyond Storage’s first level, which is exactly the 1/1 entry Table 1 reports for both. The top row separates the temporal compilation share: for SAM-TD it stays well below total time at every depth, con-sistent with the finding of §4.3 that grounding rather than compilation dominates end-to-end cost, while LiftedTCORE shows the steepest compiler-side growth, exceeding one hun-dred seconds at the deepest Openstacks level. Across the 210 method rows of the seven-method matrix, 179 solved and passed independent verification, 6 timed out, and 25 exhausted memory. Every returned plan was replayed against the original task, the original goal, and the exact source LTL f formulas, with compiled automaton facts never used as a correctness oracle. Because the protocol runs one timing measurement per exact task-and-k cell, and the two tasks of a domain end at different prefix lengths, terminal points can aggregate a single task; the curves therefore sup-port descriptive comparison rather than statistical inference. 

# F PDDLStream Experiment 1: Arbitrary Task-Specific LTL f Constraint Set 

For each environment, Experiment 1 (§4.1 of the main paper) uses one fixed, task-specific LTL f catalog. Table 2 lists all three catalogs. The five seed values in Table 3 label predeter-mined orderings of the same catalog: a run at level k jointly enforces the first k constraints of the selected ordering, so at any fixed k different orderings enforce different subsets of the catalog. Labels Gi, Ui, and F1 denote safety, strong-until precedence, and eventual-completion constraints, re-spectively. Table 2: Experiment 1 constraint catalogs for all three environments ( G: safety, U : precedence, F : completion). Tabletop abbreviates white_block , red_block , blue_block , and green_block by w, r, b, g ; Kitchen abbreviates the cup, spoon, cream cup, sugar cup, stirrer, and block by c, s, c r , c s, t, b . The six ZoneSort safety formulas cover b1, . . . , b 6, and its nine precedence formulas form the complete bipartite graph {b1, b 2, b 3} → { b4, b 5, b 6}.

Environment ID LTL f formula Interpretation Tabletop G1 G ¬InDanger (w) White block always avoids the encoded danger route. 

G2 G ¬InDanger (r) Red block always avoids the encoded danger route. 

G3 G ¬InDanger (b) Blue block always avoids the encoded danger route. 

G4 G ¬InDanger (g) Green block always avoids the encoded danger route. 

U1 ¬Moved (r) U Placed (w) Place white before moving red. 

U2 ¬Moved (b) U Placed (w) Place white before moving blue. 

U3 ¬Moved (g) U Placed (r) Place red before moving green. 

U4 ¬Moved (g) U Placed (b) Place blue before moving green. 

F1 F Placed (w) ∧ Placed (r) ∧ Placed (b) ∧ Placed (g) Eventually place all four target blocks. Kitchen G1 G ¬CupLifted (cs) Transfer sugar with the spoon without lifting its source cup. 

G2 G ¬CupLifted (t) Use the spoon for stirring instead of lifting the stirrer. 

U1 ¬ScoopDone (s) U FillDone (c) Fill the cup before scooping sugar. 

U2 ¬PourDone (cr , c ) U FillDone (c) Fill the cup before pouring cream. 

U3 ¬DumpDone (s, c ) U PourDone (cr , c ) Pour cream before dumping the spoon into the cup. 

U4 ¬CupPlaced (c) U FillDone (c) Fill the cup before placing it. 

F1 F FillDone (c) ∧ PourDone (cr , c ) ∧ ScoopDone (s)

∧ DumpDone (s, c ) ∧ StirDone (c) ∧ PushDone (b)

∧ CupPlaced (c)

Eventually achieve every tracked Kitchen mile-stone. ZoneSort G1 G ¬InDanger (b1) Block b1 uses the certified route. 

G2 G ¬InDanger (b2) Block b2 uses the certified route. 

G3 G ¬InDanger (b3) Block b3 uses the certified route. 

G4 G ¬InDanger (b4) Block b4 uses the certified route. 

G5 G ¬InDanger (b5) Block b5 uses the certified route. 

G6 G ¬InDanger (b6) Block b6 uses the certified route. 

U1 ¬moved (b4) U sorted (b1) Sort b1 before moving b4.

U2 ¬moved (b5) U sorted (b1) Sort b1 before moving b5.

U3 ¬moved (b6) U sorted (b1) Sort b1 before moving b6.

U4 ¬moved (b4) U sorted (b2) Sort b2 before moving b4.

U5 ¬moved (b5) U sorted (b2) Sort b2 before moving b5.

U6 ¬moved (b6) U sorted (b2) Sort b2 before moving b6.

U7 ¬moved (b4) U sorted (b3) Sort b3 before moving b4.

U8 ¬moved (b5) U sorted (b3) Sort b3 before moving b5.

U9 ¬moved (b6) U sorted (b3) Sort b3 before moving b6.

F1 F V 6 

> i=1

sorted (bi) Eventually sort all six blocks. Figure 5: Published PDDL3 trajectory-constraint scaling on the six classical tasks of §4.2 (two per domain), with medians taken over the tasks available at each exact k. Top row: temporal compilation time. Bottom row: total compile-plus-search time, on logarithmic axes. After a method’s first failure, its curve is held at the 180-second budget and marked with crosses (right-censored); those flat segments are not measured runtimes. Table 3: Five frozen prefix orders per environment. Entries are read from left to right: a run at level k jointly enforces the first k

constraints. The seed values are stable pool labels, not run-time shuffle instructions. 

Environment Seed Ordered constraints Tabletop 11 F1, G1, U4, G4, U1, G3, U3, G2, U2

17 G2, U4, F1, G4, U3, G3, U2, G1, U1

23 G2, U1, G4, U3, F1, G1, U2, G3, U4

31 G4, U4, G3, U2, G1, U3, F1, G2, U1

47 G4, U4, G1, U2, G2, U1, G3, U3, F1

Kitchen 11 F1, U1, U2, G1, U3, U4, G2

17 G2, U1, U4, U3, G1, U2, F1

23 U4, G1, F1, U3, U1, G2, U2

31 U3, G2, U1, F1, U4, G1, U2

47 U2, U4, G2, G1, F1, U1, U3

ZoneSort 11 F1, U6, U8, G5, U2, U4, G3, U1, G1, U9, G6, U7, G2, G4, U3, U5

17 U5, U8, G2, F1, U1, G6, U9, U3, G3, U7, U2, G4, G1, U6, U4, G5

23 U2, U6, G1, G2, U4, U1, F1, U3, G5, U7, U9, G6, G4, G3, U5, U8

31 U8, G6, U1, U9, U6, G3, U4, G4, G2, F1, U5, U7, G1, G5, U2, U3

47 G4, U1, U4, U8, U6, G5, U5, G1, U2, G3, U3, G6, F1, U7, G2, U9