Title: DeRP: An Algorithm for Self-Assembly of Power-Delivery Networks using Recursive Branching in Information-Limited Environments

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.02904v1

Published Time: Wed, 05 Aug 2026 00:15:23 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# DeRP: An Algorithm for Self-Assembly of Power-Delivery Networks using Recursive Branching in Information-Limited Environments* 

Mohammadali Rashidioun 1 and Sangwoo Park 1 and Petras Swissler 1

© 2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. 

Abstract — Delivering sustained power to distributed equip-ment in unstructured field environments using pre-planned wired networks or battery-based solutions presents significant infrastructure and logistics challenges. This paper presents Dendritic Recursive Pivoting (DeRP), a decentralized frame-work for multi-target network formation in robot swarms based solely on local communication and bearing-based sensing toward sinks. We envision a system in which robots, acting as a conduit, self-assemble a power network from a common source, forming branches at locally selected pivot points that approximate the Steiner points of Steiner trees to efficiently route to multiple Sinks. This branching operation is performed recursively to enable scalable and adaptive network formation without global planning. The proposed method is evaluated in terms of the total network length and estimated power loss, and is quantitatively compared against global baselines such as the Minimum Spanning Tree and Steiner tree solutions (GeoSteiner), which require complete knowledge of Sink lo-cations. Specifically, we found that the networks formed by DeRP asymptotically form approximately 125% of the global minimum length while reducing power losses to 65% relative to Euclidean Steiner trees. In addition, we empirically char-acterize scaling behavior by measuring simulation completion time as the number of Sinks and robots increases, and find that this scaling was sub-linear for up to 100 sinks. The proposed approach enables resilient, adaptive power delivery in environments where deployment of traditional infrastructure is challenging. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Power delivery is a major challenge of operating robotic equipment in the field. While batteries and gas generators can provide remote power sources, their bulk and inherent limits to endurance mean that these solutions are only effective for relatively short-duration deployments [1]. For more perma-nent deployments, delivery via a network of power cables can provide a more efficient and reliable approach to power delivery, but such an approach requires a significant upfront investment in infrastructure [2]. In this paper, we present an approach for robots to self-assemble an on-demand wired power network via an efficient, recursive algorithm to deliver power from a centralized power “Source” to an arbitrary number of demand “Sinks.” The natural world provides compelling evidence that near-optimal multi-terminal networks can emerge from local rules. In both living and non-living systems, dendrites grow based 

*This work was supported by the NJIT Grace Hopper AI Research Institute 

> 1

All authors are with the department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ 07102, USA mr943@njit.edu; sangwoo.park@njit.edu; petras.swissler@njit.edu (a) (b) (d) (e) (c) 

n=20 

Fig. 1. (Top) Concept for a robotic system able to create on-demand power networks from an easy-to-access power “Source” (a) to one or more remote, power-hungry devices, referred to in this paper as “Sinks” (b). Drones with deployable extension cords connect to this power Source, then fly some distance away and land on the ground (c). Other such drones (d) will, in turn, connect to these robots and extend the power network. Additional robots are released from the Source to build the network until it is completed (e). (Bottom) An efficient network formed via recursive branching. 

on environmental gradients into complex and optimized net-works through the process of dendritic arborization [3]–[5]. In living systems, the slime mold Physarum polycephalum is a particularly interesting example: without centralized con-trol, it grows transport networks that rival human-engineered systems in efficiency [6], [7]. A similar principle governs leaf venation, where new vascular tissue extends incremen-tally toward the nearest under-served region guided only by local auxin concentration gradients [8]. Ronellenfitsch and Katifori [9] showed that this coupling between incremental outward growth and local adaptive feedback is what allows biological networks to escape local minima and move toward dramatically improved topologies. arXiv:2608.02904v1 [cs.RO] 3 Aug 2026 Robot swarms have demonstrated analogous self-organizing capabilities in path and chain formation. Nouyan et al. [10] showed that a swarm of simple robots can form a connected physical chain between a Source and a single target using only local communication, without any global map or centralized planner. More recent work has extended this to constrained platforms such as nano-drones operating in open spaces [11], and to relay deployment problems where robots maintain communication links in multi-robot teams [12]. However, these existing approaches are limited to single-path connectivity : they connect one Source to one target, but do not address the problem of self-assembling a branching tree that efficiently routes from one Source to multiple terminals simultaneously. The problem of connecting a set of terminals with minimum total edge length in the Euclidean plane is formalized as the Euclidean Steiner Minimum Tree (ESMT) problem — a classic NP-hard combinatorial optimization problem [13]. Unlike the Minimum Spanning Tree (MST), which connects terminals by edges between them directly, the Steiner tree may intro-duce additional intermediate junction points called Steiner points that reduce the total length. On the algorithmic side, centralized solvers such as GeoSteiner [14] yield globally optimal Steiner trees but require a priori knowledge of all Sink locations and offline computation before deploy-ment, conditions that are frequently unavailable in the field. Decentralized approaches for multi-target deployment have been proposed [15], but these optimize for connectivity preservation rather than network length and do not compare against optimal routing baselines. The problem we address in this paper sits at the intersec-tion of these two bodies of work, in the domain of functional self-assembly, where swarms physically construct to form structures [16]–[18]. Like biological transport networks, the structure must branch efficiently toward multiple targets; like robotic chain formation, it must emerge from bottom-up interactions of simple agents. Unlike either, it must simulta-neously satisfy the constraints of physical robot deployment while achieving a total network length competitive with globally optimal baselines: the Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) and the Steiner Minimum Tree (SMT). Inspired by dendrite arborization, we consider a swarm of mobile robots tasked with forming a physical power delivery network from a single Source to n spatially distributed Sinks using limited communication and sensing, with no global knowledge of Sink positions. This work has two major contributions. First, to our knowledge, the use of swarms and self-assembly approaches to power delivery networks is a novel application that has not previously been explored. Second, we present an algorithm for achieving these power networks via a recursive process of linear growth and pivoting, which we name Dendritic Recursive Pivoting (DeRP). II. C ONCEPTUALIZED ROBOT PLATFORM 

As the concept of a self-assembling power network has not previously been considered in the literature, it is necessary to conceptualize what a hardware platform capable of perform-ing this task would look like in order to ground our algorithm in current technological capabilities, with the understanding that significant work would be necessary to actually develop and deploy a real-world system. Fig. 1 shows a conceptual illustration of such a system. We anticipate such a system finding use in defense and disaster applications, where fast deployment is necessary, the ability to globally communicate may be limited, and where a priori knowledge is unavailable. We envision such a system to be used at large scales (e.g. 

>100 km 2). DeRP assumes four capabilities of the robots: 

a) Movement and connection: Robots are able to attach a power cable to some fixed position and then extend the network by moving to some other location while deploying a power cable. Although conceptualized with flying robots, this could also be done with ground vehicles. 

b) Local communication: Robots are able to communi-cate within some communication radius rcomm , such as via Bluetooth Low Energy, IR, or Li-Fi. 

c) Relative neighbor pose estimation: Robots can es-timate the relative position and bearing towards neighbor-ing robots within communication range. This capability is consistent with the directed sensing model assumed in hi-erarchical bearing-based frameworks [19], where each robot tracks the bearing to its Parent neighbors using only onboard sensors and without access to a global reference frame. 

d) Sensing heading towards Sinks: Robots can sense the direction toward Sinks. Robots do not require knowl-edge of their distance to or global position of these Sinks. This can be realized across operationally relevant scales by equipping Sinks with active RF or IR beacons. At short range, circumferential IR receiver arrays provide a lightweight bearing estimate within typical communication distances, without demanding distance measurements. At field scale, UAV-based radio direction-finding systems have demonstrated bearing estimation toward active VHF beacon transmitters at ranges exceeding one kilometer [20], with median bearing errors below 7°. Similarly, RF bearing toward active emergency locator beacons is common in search and rescue operations at distances of several kilometers [21]. Within the swarm robotics literature, bearing-based homing toward active beacons has been demonstrated on both ground and aerial platforms [22], confirming it as a well-established sensing primitive. III. D ERP A LGORITHM DESCRIPTION 

DeRP enables a swarm of homogeneous robots to self-assemble into a network that connects a fixed Source to an arbitrary number of spatially distributed Sinks. Starting from the Source, the network grows incrementally as robots are recruited one by one into a tree structure, branching recur-sively at locally selected pivot nodes to route toward multiple Sinks simultaneously. This branching process repeats at each level of the tree until every Sink has been reached, yielding a fully connected network without global planning or exact knowledge of Sink locations: each robot acts solely on 123Branch [1] Branch [10] Branch [111] Branch [11] Branch [110] ??Source Sink Moving Straight Pivot (a) (c) (b) (d) (e) Fig. 2. Illustration of the key algorithmic mechanisms. (a) Each Pivot node partitions its local environment into two half-planes using the incoming branch direction as a reference axis: starboard ( +, right) and port ( −, left). (b) The robot with the lowest E(r) metric (closest to the ideal 120 ° Steiner angle with respect to its starboard and port Sink sets) is promoted to Pivot among its local neighborhood. (c) Upon branching, the “Pivot” appends    

> "1" to the branch ID of its starboard Child and "0" to the branch ID of its port Child, propagating unique identifiers recursively along each branch. (d) Moving Robots without an active recruitment signal follow the guidance direction broadcast by nearby Network Robots. (e) When a Moving Robot receives simultaneous guidance messages from multiple Network Robots, it prefers to follow the robot with the highest branch ID. This deterministic priority rule prevents oscillation between competing recruiters, ensuring robots commit to a single branch.

bearing measurements to nearby Sinks and short integer messages exchanged with immediate neighbors. The quality of the emergent network is evaluated in section IV. 

A. Robot Roles 

Robots take on one of two roles that determine their behaviors: Moving or Network Robot. 

a) Moving Robots: All robots begin in the Moving 

role and navigate autonomously according to a three-priority hierarchy (Algorithm 1):  

> •

Respond to a Network Robot requesting a “Child.”  

> •

Follow the growth direction broadcast by a Network Robot that is not requesting a Child (due to already reaching its Child limit). When multiple Network Robots provide guidance simultaneously, the Moving Robot preferentially follows the one with the highest branch ID value. This is how Moving Robots navigate without global information  

> •

Drift toward the Source otherwise. This ordering ensures that direct attachment opportunities always override passive navigation. Upon being accepted by a Network Robot as a Child, a Moving Robot transitions to the Network agent (Algorithm 1). Calculate Error 123Port Starboard       

> θ-θ+Mean
> ?Parent child 123Msg: [1], [2,3] Mean Msg: [2,3] Port Starboard
> Fig. 3. Branch selection process. (Top) Message aggregation and Error evaluation using E(r). (Bottom) Updated branching configuration.

b) Network Robots: Once a Moving Robot is recruited as a Child to a Network Robot, it transitions to the Network role and begins participating in the tree structure as follows (Algorithm 2). Every Network Robot maintains a fixed spacing R from its “Parent” in an assigned direction ˆd, using a local spacing controller (Eq. 1) to hold its position in the tree. The controller computes a velocity command from two error terms: 

v = KR er ˆu − Kθ eθ ˆu⊥ (1) 

er = ∥pparent − pr ∥ − R (2) 

eθ = ˆ u × ˆu∗ ≜ uxu∗ 

> y

− uy u∗ 

> x

(3) where ˆu is the actual unit vector from the robot toward its Parent; ˆu∗ = − ˆd is the desired direction from the robot toward its Parent, implied by the assigned growth direction 

ˆd (which points from Parent to Child); ˆu⊥ is ˆu rotated 90 ◦

counter-clockwise; the cross product above denotes the scalar (perp-dot) product in the plane, equal to sin θ for the signed angle θ from ˆu to ˆu∗; and KR, Kθ are proportional gains. Simultaneously, it actively recruits a Child by broadcasting a request to nearby Moving agents within its communication range. The recruitment behavior differs by the node subtype: A Straight node broadcasts a generic Child request and, upon accepting a Child, passes its full set of assigned Sinks 

S and branch ID downstream. The growth direction ˆd passed to the Child is computed as the normalized sum of unit vectors toward each assigned Sink, i.e., a mean-bearing rule. This treat each Sink as equally weighted regardless of distance, ensuring that the growth direction reflects the Algorithm 1: Moving Robot Behavior 

initialize role ← Moving 

while role = Moving do 

Receive messages from all robots j within rcomm 

if a Network Robot requests a Child then 

Among requesting Network Robots, move toward the nearest one 

end else 

Select the nearby Network Robot with the highest branch ID that provides guidance 

if a guiding Network Robot is found then 

Follow the Network growth direction from Parent to Child 

end else 

Move toward the Source 

end end if accepted by a Network Robot then 

role ← Network 

end end 

angular distribution of Sinks rather than being biased toward nearby ones. A Pivot node partitions its local environment using the incoming branch direction ˆuin = xi−xParent  

> ∥xi−xParent ∥

as a reference axis. The line passing through the Pivot perpendicular to ˆuin 

divides the surrounding space into two half-planes: starboard (+) and port ( −). A Moving Robot determines its side by evaluating sign (ˆ uin × ˆvic ), where ˆvic is the unit vector from the Pivot to the Moving Robot. Only robots on a needed side respond to the request. Each Child is then assigned exclusively to one side: the starboard Child receives S+ and growth direction ˆd+, and the port Child receives S− and growth direction ˆd−.

B. Pivot Selection and Branch Formation 

The core novelty of the algorithm lies in how the Network Robots locally decide to branch. In an optimal Steiner tree, every junction or Steiner point satisfies a necessary geometric condition: the three edges meeting at each Steiner point form pairwise angles of exactly 120 ° [23]. Our algorithm approximates this condition locally by having each settled Network Robot evaluate how closely its own geometry resembles a Steiner point. Specifically, each Network Robot r with Parent p and Child c constructs three directional axes: one from r towards 

p, one toward the average bearing of the starboard Sinks 

S+, and one toward the average bearing of the port Sinks 

S−. The pivot eligibility metric E(r) measures the total angular deviation of these three axes from the ideal 120 °configuration: 

E(r) = |θ+ − 120 °| + |θ− − 120 °| (4) 

Algorithm 2: Network Robot Behavior 

while role = Network do 

Maintain spacing R from Parent in direction ˆd

Receive messages from all robots j within rcomm 

if recruitment is allowed then if node type = STRAIGHT then 

Broadcast Child request 

end else 

Compute incoming direction 

ˆuin = xr −xParent  

> ∥xr−xParent ∥

Broadcast side-specific Child request (STAR / PORT) 

end end foreach reply from a free robot do if recruitment is still allowed then if node type = STRAIGHT then 

Assign all Sinks and branch label to Child 

end else 

Compute Child direction 

ˆuc = xc−xr 

> ∥xc−xr∥

Determine side: 

σ ← sign (cross(ˆ uin , ˆuc)) 

if side σ is already occupied then 

Reject this robot 

continue end end 

Set Child growth direction using mean-bearing rule Attach Child and notify it 

break end end end 

where θ+ and θ− are the angles between ˆup→r and the average bearing toward S+ and S− respectively. A smaller 

E(r) indicates a geometry closer to the optimal Steiner configuration. Pivot selection relies solely on local communication; no global knowledge of Sink positions, network topology, or the eligibility of other robots is required. After its Child has settled into its desired position at spacing R, each Network Robot compares its own metric against those of its immediate Parent and Child only. If E(r) < E (p) and E(r) < E (c),robot r promotes itself to a Pivot node and initiates a branch split toward starboard and port (Algorithm 3). 

C. Termination Condition 

A branch terminates when the last robot in the branch comes within rSink of its assigned Sink. Upon touching a Algorithm 3: Pivot Selection 

Input: Network Robot r with Parent p, Child c, and assigned Sinks Sr

Require: |S r | ≥ 2

Split Sr into SL, SR on either side of ˆup→r

if SL = ∅ or SR = ∅ then return // all Sinks on one side, no split needed 

end 

Compute pivot metric: 

E(r) = |θL − 120 °| + |θR − 120 °|

where θL, θR are angles between ˆup→r and the average bearing toward SL, SR

if E(r) < E (p) and E(r) < E (c) then 

r becomes a pivot node and initiates branch split 

end n=50 n=20 n=100             

> n=2 n=4 n=10
> Fig. 4. DeRP network topology for n∈ { 2,4,10 ,20 ,50 ,100 }Sinks. Branching depth and number of pivots grow with n.

Sink, the end of the branch initiates a completion flag that travels upstream through the chain until it reaches the nearest Pivot node, signaling that no further guidance should be broadcast on that branch. The full network is complete when all n Sinks have been connected to the network. IV. A LGORITHM VALIDATION 

To investigate how the proposed approach scales with problem size, we vary the number of Sinks with quantities 

n ∈ { 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 , 12 , 15 , 20 , 30 , 40 , 50 , 100 }: a total of 12 configurations. In each trial, Sinks are placed uniformly at random within a fixed 2500 × 2500 unit arena, subject to a minimum pairwise separation of rcomm to avoid clustered configurations. The Source is fixed at a constant position across all trials. Robots are introduced into the arena sequentially at a fixed spawn interval beginning at the Source location. Each robot starts in the Moving role and follows the behavioral rules described in Section III until it is recruited into the network. DeRP MST (Prim’s) Geosteiner (ESMT)                      

> Fig. 5. Quantitative Metric Comparison of Network Topologies: (Top) DeRP; (Bot. Left) MST; (Bot. Right) GeoSteiner- ESMT. TABLE I SIMULATION PARAMETERS
> Parameter Symbol Value
> Inter-robot spacing R60 units Communication range rcomm 180 units Arena size —2500 ×2500 units Sink touch distance rSink 60 units Minimum Sink separation —180 units Number of Sinks n2–100 Trials per configuration —50

No upper limit on total robot count is imposed during a trial; the simulation terminates when all Sinks have been reached. All other parameters are held constant across scenarios at the values reported in Table I. Fig. 4 illustrates representative completed networks for n ∈ { 2, 4, 10 , 20 , 50 , 100 }. At small Sink counts, the network forms a shallow tree with few Pivot nodes; as n grows, the recursive branching structure produces progressively deeper trees that spread to cover the arena. This qualitative progression is consistent with the quantitative trends reported in the following subsections. We evaluate DeRP based on three efficiency metrics: 

a) Network Length.: The primary structural metric is the total length of the assembled robot network, defined as the sum of all Parent-Child edge lengths in the tree. To assess quality relative to optimal baselines, we report the ratio of robot network length to the optimal Steiner Tree length computed over the Source and all Sinks using GeoSteiner [14], which represents the tightest possible lower bound. A ratio near 1.0 indicates near-optimal routing. We also compare against a Minimum Spanning Tree length. 

b) Completion timesteps: We measure empirical com-plexity as the total number of fixed-timestep simulation steps required to reach all Sinks, recorded as a function of Sink count n. Since robots are spawned at a fixed rate throughout the simulation, completion time reflects both the geometric difficulty of the problem and the recruitment dynamics of the algorithm. This allows us to characterize the observed scaling behavior as the number of Sinks grows. 

c) Power Loss: To evaluate energy efficiency, we model power transmission loss using the standard I2R distribution network analogy [24], [25]. Since robots maintain a constant inter-robot spacing of R = 60 , the number of robots on each branch serves as a direct proxy for branch resistance (Re ∝ nrobots (e)), and the current Ie through each branch is proportional to the fraction of Sinks served downstream, relative to the total Sink count, reflecting aggregated power demand. Total network power loss is then: 

Ptotal = X

> e∈E

I2 

> e

· nrobots (e) (5) where E is the set of network edges, and Ie is defined as: 

Ie = ke

n (6) where ke is the number of Sinks downstream of branch e

and n is the total Sink count. This normalization models each Sink as drawing an equal share of a fixed total current, isolating topological efficiency from absolute power demand. Although GeoSteiner minimizes total network length, length minimization is a linear objective, whereas power loss, defined in Eq. (5), penalizes current on shared segments quadratically. These two objectives are not equivalent, and minimizing one does not necessarily minimize the other. 

A. Network Length 

Although DeRP operates without global knowledge of Sink positions, the emergent network lengths are competitive with the centralized baselines. Fig. 6 reports the mean total network length for DeRP, MST, and Geosteiner across all Sink counts. The ratio between our DeRP network length and the Geosteiner-provided optimal Steiner tree length- is annotated directly on each bar as a primary measure of routing quality. The DeRP length remains within 1.04 ×–

1.25 × of the Geosteiner optimal across all configurations, with the ratio stabilizing beyond n = 30 and showing no unbounded growth at n = 100 . The average network length per Sink decreases monotonically from 1193 units at n = 2 

to 286 units at n = 100 for the robot network, a result of increasing path sharing as branching depth grows. 

B. Completion timesteps 

Fig. 7 shows total simulation steps as a function of Sink count. Steps increase monotonically with problem size, yet sub-linearly: a 50 × increase in Sink count produces only a 10 .8× increase in total steps. This sub-linear trend is reflected in two complementary measures. First, the marginal step cost per additional Sink decreases from approximately 

42 ,600 steps at n = 2 –4 to 5,100 steps beyond n = 50 ,an 8× reduction that reflects growing reuse of shared trunk segments as the network expands. Second, the mean number of robots deployed per Sink falls from 19 .3 at n = 2

to 4.3 at n = 100 , confirming that the network becomes structurally more efficient at scale. Both trends are consistent with the recursive branching structure of the algorithm: early trunk segments are shared by an increasing number of downstream branches, reducing the marginal cost of routing each additional Sink. 

C. Power Loss 

Fig. 8 compares power loss across all configurations. The most significant finding is that the DeRP power loss remains effectively constant across all tested Sinks. Minimiz-ing power loss is an objective that quadratically penalizes high current on shared trunk lines. The DeRP method, by introducing branch points earlier, distributes current more aggressively and consistently outperforms GeoSteiner on power loss across all configurations. For example, at n =50 , the robot network incurs only 68% of GeoSteiner’s power loss and 67 .5% of MST’s, an advantage that grows steadily with problem size. This suggests that the local 120 °branching criterion implicitly favors topologies that branch earlier, reducing the length of shared high-current segments near the Source and thereby lowering the total I2R loss. V. D ISCUSSION 

Across all three metrics, the DeRP algorithm produces networks that are competitive with centralized baselines despite relying solely on local information. Network length remains within 1.04–1.25 × of the GeoSteiner optimal, with the ratio stabilizing beyond n = 30 , indicating that the overhead of local decision-making is bounded. The most significant finding concerns power loss. Despite being longer than GeoSteiner, the robot network incurs lower mean power loss in every configuration. This is explained by the quadratic nature of I2R: earlier, more aggressive branch-ing reduces current aggregation on shared trunk segments near the Source. A factor that increases network length is the higher number of Pivot nodes produced by the decentralized algorithm. Additional branch points introduce extra segments, which can increase total path length relative to the Steiner optimum. We therefore analyze the Pivot count across all configurations to quantify this structural overhead. Since the robot network forms a tree in which every Pivot has exactly two Children, giving it degree three: the theoretical upper bound on the number of Pivot nodes follows directly from the degree sum formula k ≤ n − 2, where k is the number of Pivot nodes and n is the total number of terminals (Source + Sinks), independently of any optimality argument [23]. Empirically, as shown in Fig. 9, DeRP produces on average 1.53 × the number of Pivots as Geosteiner across all configurations. This is a cost of local decision-making, since robots do not know globally whether a branch point is truly optimal. However, this ratio remains stable across all tested prob-lem sizes, indicating that the overhead scales proportionally rather than growing without bound, and network lengths remain competitive despite the additional pivots. VI. C ONCLUSION 

The DeRP framework demonstrates that a swarm of robots without full global knowledge can self-assemble power Fig. 6. Total network length comparison across Sink counts. Error bars indicate ±1σ over all trials The DeRP method is compared against the Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) and the geometric Steiner tree (GeoSteiner) baseline. Error bars indicate standard deviation over 50 trials. Annotation on the DeRP bar indicates the ratio of DeRP length to the GeoSteiner optimal baseline.  

> Fig. 7. Total simulation steps as a function of the number of Sinks.

delivery networks competitive with centralized baselines. Unlike MST and GeoSteiner, which require complete prior knowledge of all Sink locations and are not designed for decentralized execution, DeRP operates with local informa-tion only. It trades a bounded length overhead of up to 

25% relative to the ESMT optimum for this capability, while outperforming both baselines on power efficiency across all tested configurations. Empirically, the length ratio remains stable with problem size, and completion timesteps scale sub-linearly with the number of Sinks. Several directions remain open for extending the pre-sented algorithm. First, the current pivots are static. Anatural extension would allow pivot Network Robots to dynamically adjust their positions after placement, iteratively correcting toward the exact 120 ° angle used in Steiner trees. Secondly, the current starboard-over-port branching is based on a fixed criterion that always prefers starboard over port. Future work could replace this with a demand-aware criterion. For example, prioritizing branches toward Sinks with lower remaining battery levels, allowing the network to adapt its routing to the urgency of power demand at each terminal. Third, while the present evaluation uses a uniformly random Sink distribution, real deployments are likely to involve heterogeneous configurations. A systematic analysis of algorithm performance under such distributions is planned. Finally, physical validation on a hardware swarm platform remains an important next step to confirm that the algorithm’s performance translates from simulation to real-world deployment conditions. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

We thank Amin Taghieh, Nidhi Sakpal, and Pranay KC for their input and contributions throughout the project, and especially Maria Angel Palacios Sarmiento for assistance in preliminary investigations. 

AI Disclosure: Some helper functions were generated using Claude Anthropic and were checked for correctness. All algorithmic design was performed entirely by the authors. Source code available on request; all AI-assisted functions are noted in comments. REFERENCES [1] C. A. Aubin, B. Gorissen, E. Milana, P. R. Buskohl, N. Lazarus, G. A. Slipher, C. Keplinger, J. Bongard, F. Iida, J. A. Lewis et al. , “Towards enduring autonomous robots via embodied energy,” Nature , vol. 602, no. 7897, pp. 393–402, 2022. [2] A. Rastgou, “Distribution network expansion planning: An updated review of current methods and new challenges,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews , vol. 189, p. 114062, 2024. [3] J. Arikkath, “Molecular mechanisms of dendrite morphogenesis,”              

> Frontiers in cellular neuroscience , vol. 6, p. 61, 2012. [4] A. Luczak, “Spatial embedding of neuronal trees modeled by diffusive growth,” J. of neuroscience meth. , vol. 157, no. 1, pp. 132–141, 2006. [5] A. Kumar, K. Janzakova, Y. Coffinier, S. Pecqueur, and F. Alibart, “Theoretical modeling of dendrite growth from conductive wire electro-polymerization,” Sci. Reports , vol. 12, no. 1, p. 6395, 2022. [6] A. Tero, S. Takagi, T. Saigusa, K. Ito, D. P. Bebber, M. D. Fricker, K. Yates, A. J. Bladon, and T. Nakagaki, “Rules for biologically inspired adaptive network design,” Science , vol. 327, no. 5964, pp. 439–442, 2010.

Fig. 8. Power loss as a function of the number of Sinks for three routing strategies (MST, GeoSteiner, and Robot Network). Bars show the mean power loss over multiple runs and error bars indicate variability across trials (mean ± standard deviation). Annotation on the DeRP bar indicates the ratio of DeRP Power loss to the GeoSteiner. 

Fig. 9. Pivot count versus number of Sinks for GeoSteiner and DeRP. Error bars denote standard deviation. [7] S. K. Ray, G. Valentini, P. Shah, A. Haque, C. R. Reid, G. F. Weber, and S. Garnier, “Information transfer during food choice in the slime mold physarum polycephalum,” Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution ,vol. 7, p. 67, 2019. [8] A. Runions, M. Fuhrer, B. Lane, P. Federl, A.-G. Rolland-Lagan, and P. Prusinkiewicz, “Modeling and visualization of leaf venation patterns,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2005 Papers , ser. SIGGRAPH ’05. ACM, 2005, pp. 702–711. [9] H. Ronellenfitsch and E. Katifori, “Global optimization, local adapta-tion, and the role of growth in distribution networks,” Physical Review Letters , vol. 117, no. 13, p. 138301, 2016. [10] S. Nouyan, A. Campo, and M. Dorigo, “Path formation in a robot swarm,” Swarm Intelligence , vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–23, 2008. [11] A. Barci´ s, M. Barci´ s, E. Natalizio, and E. Ferrante, “Self-organized chain formation of nano-drones in an open space,” in Swarm Intelli-gence: 13th International Conference, ANTS 2022 , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 13491. Springer, 2022, pp. 217–229. [12] Y. Pei and M. W. Mutka, “Steiner traveler: Relay deployment for remote sensing in heterogeneous multi-robot exploration,” in 2012 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) .IEEE, 2012, pp. 1551–1556. [13] M. R. Garey and D. S. Johnson, Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory of NP-Completeness . New York: W. H. Freeman, 1979. [14] D. Juhl, D. M. Warme, P. Winter, and M. Zachariasen, “The GeoSteiner software package for computing Steiner trees in the plane: an updated computational study,” Mathematical Programming Computation , vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 487–532, 2018. [15] N. Majcherczyk, A. Jayabalan, G. Beltrame, and C. Pinciroli, “De-centralized connectivity-preserving deployment of large-scale robot swarms,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 2018. [16] J. Werfel, K. Petersen, and R. Nagpal, “Designing collective behavior in a termite-inspired robot construction team,” Science , vol. 343, no. 6172, pp. 754–758, 2014. [17] M. Rubenstein, A. Cornejo, and R. Nagpal, “Programmable self-assembly in a thousand-robot swarm,” Science , vol. 345, no. 6198, pp. 795–799, 2014. [18] P. Swissler, “Behavioral heterogeneity enhances self-assembly: Ex-ploring variants of the reactivebuild algorithm,” in Int’l Symp. on Distributed Autonomous Robotic Sys. Springer, 2024, pp. 100–114. [19] Y. Zhang, S. Oguz, S. Wang, E. Garone, X. Wang, M. Dorigo, and M. K. Heinrich, “Self-reconfigurable hierarchical frameworks for formation control of robot swarms,” IEEE Trans. Cybernetics , vol. 54, no. 1. [20] O. M. Cliff, R. Fitch, S. Sukkarieh, D. L. Saunders, and R. Heinsohn, “Online localization of radio-tagged wildlife with an autonomous aerial robot,” Robotics: Science and Systems , 2015. [21] Cospas-Sarsat Secretariat, “Introduction to the cospas-sarsat system,” Cospas-Sarsat, Tech. Rep., 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www. cospas-sarsat.int [22] G. C. de Croon, J. J. Dupeyroux, S. B. Fuller, and J. A. Marshall, “Minimal navigation solution for a swarm of tiny flying robots to explore an unknown environment,” Science Robotics , vol. 4, no. 35, 2019. [23] F. K. Hwang, D. S. Richards, and P. Winter, “The steiner tree problem,” 

Annals of Operations Research , vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 1–339, 1992. [24] F. F. C. Silva, P. M. S. Carvalho, L. A. F. M. Ferreira, and Y. Omar, “A quantum computing approach for minimum loss problems in electrical distribution networks,” Sci. Reports , vol. 13, no. 1, p. 10787, 2023. [25] R. Borisov, A. Gusev, and S. Podvalny, “Power flows and losses calculation in radial networks by representing the network topology in the hierarchical structure form,” Energies , vol. 15, no. 3, p. 765, 2022.