Title: Coordinated Motion Planning for Multi-Arm Systems via Iterative LQ Games

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.27726v1

Published Time: Mon, 31 Aug 2026 00:16:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Coordinated Motion Planning for Multi-Arm Systems via Iterative LQ Games 

Junyoung Kim, Hanwen Ren, Lei Zhang, and Ahmed H. Qureshi Start Configuration Avoiding Obstacles Subgoal1 Avoiding Collision Avoiding Obstacles Subgoal2 Avoiding Collision Final Configuration       

> X(0) X(1) X(2) X(3 )
> X(4) X(5) X(6) X(7)

Fig. 1: The figure shows a multi-agent motion planning with static obstacles. Each key-frame shows the description of each movement with the time step on the right corner. Our ILQ-Arm finds collision free solution in 1.065 seconds, while the execution lasted 110 seconds. 

Abstract — Multi-agent motion planning for high-degree-of-freedom robotics manipulators in shared workspaces remains a fundamental yet challenging problem. Centralized planners often suffer from poor scalability, while decentralized ap-proaches face robustness and safety concerns. Game-theoretic formulations offer a promising approach for modeling agent interactions, potentially overcoming these limitations. However, their application to articulated multi-arm systems remains limited. This paper presents an iterative Linear Quadratic (LQ) game framework for multi-manipulator motion planning, where each manipulator is modeled as an independent agent optimiz-ing its own objective while interacting with other agents based on shared global states and collision constraints. The method solves a series of local LQ games by linearizing the dynamics and approximating the cost around a nominal trajectory, with Riccati backward recursions yielding feedback Nash strategies. To address the challenges of articulated systems, we incorporate differentiable penalties for self-collision and inter-arm collision into the optimization pipeline, enabling coordinated, collision-aware trajectory generation. Experiments demonstrate that our framework produces smooth, safe, and efficient trajectories in high-dimensional settings, outperforming traditional methods. This highlights the effectiveness of differential game formula-tions for multi-robot manipulation. 

I. INTRODUCTION Multi-Agent Motion Planning (MAMP) for multiple robotic manipulators is a fundamental challenge in vari-ous underlying robotics applications, including collaborative assembly [1], [2], warehouse automation [3], [4], surgical                        

> Junyoung Kim, Hanwen Ren, Lei Zhang and Ahmed H. Qureshi are with the Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA, 47907. Email

{kim3722, ren221, zhan5814, ahqureshi }@purdue.edu .

robotics [5], and human-robot interaction [6], [7]. These ap-plications require the coordination of multiple high-degree-of-freedom (DoF) arms within shared workspaces, where the robots must not only achieve their respective tasks but also ensure safe operation by avoiding collisions. This makes MAMP crucial for the effective deployment of multi-robot systems in dynamic environments. Existing motion planning algorithms can be categorized into centralized and decentralized approaches. Classical cen-tralized planners rely on a central controller to generate actions for all agents, optimizing over the joint state space to provide globally consistent solutions. While these methods work well in low-dimensional settings, they struggle with scalability and real-time performance in multi-manipulator scenarios. In contrast, decentralized planners allow each agent to plan independently, improving computational ef-ficiency. However, they often face challenges related to coordination, robustness, and safety, as they rely on policy assumptions or predictions regarding the actions of other agents. To address these challenges, game-theoretic formulations provide a promising framework for modeling interactions among agents. In differential games, each agent minimizes its own cost function while considering the interactions with other agents based on the shared global state. A Nash equilibrium is achieved when each agent’s strategy is the best response to the strategies of the others, meaning no agent can improve their payoff by unilaterally changing their strategy. This approach has been widely applied in domains such as autonomous driving [8], pursuit-evasion arXiv:2608.27726v1 [cs.RO] 27 Aug 2026 scenarios [9], [10], and multi-robotic systems [11]. Among the game-theoretic solution methods, Linear Quadratic (LQ) games [12], [13] offer closed-form solutions for the Nash equilibria under linear dynamics and quadratic costs. To extend to nonlinear systems, iterative Linear-Quadratic (ILQ) games [14] linearize the dynamics and approximate the cost around a nominal trajectory. This results in a series of local LQ games, which can be efficiently solved via Riccati backward recursions, yielding time-varying state feedback Nash strategies. ILQ game formulations have demonstrated strong performance in multi-vehicle and interactive control scenarios due to their computational efficiency and compat-ibility with feedback policies [8]. Despite the advantages of ILQ methods in low-dimensional systems, such as ground vehicles and bicycle kinematics models, their application to high-DOF robotic manipulators remains unexplored. Multi-arm manipulation introduces additional challenges, including complex articu-lated kinematics, self-collision constraints, and tightly cou-pled geometric interaction. These challenges are difficult to model within traditional ILQ frameworks, which struggle to handle the complexity of collision penalties and the numeri-cal conditioning required for second-order optimization pro-cedures. Extending the ILQ framework to effectively model and solve multi-agent motion planning (MAMP) for robotic manipulators is a critical practical challenge that remains largely underexplored from a game-theoretic perspective. To address these challenges, we present ILQ-Arm, amotion planning framework for multi-manipulator systems based on the ILQ game framework. In our approach, each manipulator is modeled as an independent agent seeking to minimize its own objective while interacting with other agents based on shared global states and collision con-straints. Thus, our ILQ-Arm is a centralized solver that computes decentralized, per-agent feedback strategies by jointly solving each agent’s local game around the shared global state. By leveraging the computational efficiency of ILQ games, our method efficiently computes time-varying state-feedback Nash strategies for high-DoF articulated sys-tems. Unlike prior ILQ game formulations, which focus on low-dimensional agents with simplified geometries, ILQ-Arm explicitly incorporates differentiable self-collision and inter-arm collision penalties tailored to complex manipulator kinematics. This enables coordinated, collision-aware motion generation within a unified second-order optimization frame-work. Our key contributions are summarized as follows.  

> •

A differential game formulation for multi-manipulator motion planning, where each arm is modeled as an optimization agent, and feedback Nash strategies are computed using an ILQ game procedure.  

> •

An integration of differentiable geometric collision penalties, including self-collision modeling, within the ILQ game backward–forward optimization pipeline.  

> •

A systematic analysis of cost design, including quadratic control regularization and goal costs, demon-strating their impact on convergence, safety, and trajec-tory quality.  

> •

Extensive validation on challenging multi-arm planning scenarios, involving varying numbers of agents and diverse environmental constraints. Our framework enables safety through geometric collision penalties, including self-collision modeling, while ensuring smooth, dynamically consistent trajectories through quadratic control regularization. The game-theoretic framework natu-rally models interaction between manipulators, enabling co-ordinated behavior to emerge from the optimization process without relying on fixed priority rules. By extending ILQ games to high-dimensional articulated systems, ILQ-Arm provides a principled and scalable solution for safe multi-agent manipulation in shared workspaces. II. RELATED WORK This section reviews prior work on MAMP, which spans centralized and decentralized approaches, learning-based strategies, trajectory optimization techniques, and game-theoretic formulations. 

A. Centralized and Decentralized Classical Approaches 

Classical approaches to multi-agent motion planning can be broadly categorized into centralized and decentralized paradigms, each offering different trade-offs between co-ordination and scalability. The centralized motion planning methods jointly optimize the composite configuration space of all agents, allowing global coordinated behavior [15], [16]. While it is effective for a smaller scale, its complexity grows rapidly with the number of agents and system dimensionality, limiting scalability in high DoF manipulation settings. On the other hand, to improve scalability, decentralized approaches allow each agent to plan independently. Geometric methods such as velocity obstacles and reciprocal velocity obstacles compute collision-free motions in velocity space [17], [18], while Model Predictive Control (MPC) [19] has been ex-tended to multi-robot coordination [20]. Although compu-tationally efficient, these methods often rely on simplified geometric assumptions and may struggle in tightly coupled scenarios involving articulated manipulators with complex collision geometries. 

B. Data-Driven Methods 

Learning-based approaches have recently shown promis-ing performance in high-dimensional multi-robot systems. Neural policies trained via imitation learning or reinforce-ment learning enable fast deployment after offline training [21]. Safety-aware extensions incorporate shielding mecha-nisms, control barrier functions (CBFs), or Hamilton-Jacobi reachability (HJR) constraints to enhance robustness [22], [23]. Neural approximations of HJR value functions fur-ther improve scalability [24], [25]. Despite these advances, learning-based methods often depend on extensive training data, may lack interpretability, and can exhibit limited gen-eralization outside the training distribution. C. Trajectory Optimization 

Trajectory optimization [26] provides a complementary framework for handling nonlinear dynamics and rich safety constraints by directly optimizing trajectories over a finite horizon. Methods such as CHOMP [27], TrajOpt [16], and ILQR [28] optimize smoothness, dynamic feasibility, and collision-aware objectives within a unified formulation. These approaches are well-suited for high-dimensional sys-tems and can incorporate control regularization and goal costs in a principled manner. However, most optimization-based MAMP methods treat other agents as dynamic obsta-cles within a single aggregated objective that can implicitly favor one agent’s cost over another’s, rather than explicitly modeling their strategic interactions. 

D. Game-theoretic Formulations 

Game-theoretic formulations provide a principled way to capture coupled decision-making among multiple agents. Differential games model each agent as minimizing its own objective while considering the strategies of other agents, whose actions affect the shared dynamics [12]. LQ games allow the computation of feedback Nash equilibrium via Riccati-type recursions [13], and ILQ methods extend this approach to nonlinear systems by iteratively linearizing the dynamics and approximating the cost [14], [28]. These techniques have been successfully applied in domains such as autonomous driving and competitive robotics [8], [29], where strategic iteration is central. Nevertheless, the application of ILQ differential games to high-DoF robotic manipulators remains largely unexplored. Prior work primarily focuses on low-dimensional vehicles or simplified collision models, leaving open the challenge of integrating complex link geometries and self-collision constraints within a game-theoretic framework. 

E. Positioning of Our Work 

In this work, we bridge trajectory optimization and differ-ential game theory by formulating multi-manipulator motion planning as a differential game. Instead of imposing fixed priorities or treating agents as passive obstacles, we compute time-varying feedback Nash strategies using an iterative LQ game procedure. By explicitly incorporating quadratic con-trol regularization, goal costs, and self-collision penalties, our approach extends ILQ game methods to high-dimensional articulated systems and demonstrates their effectiveness for coordinated multi-agent manipulation. III. METHOD This section presents ILQ-Arm, our approach for solving multi-agent motion planning tasks for robot arm manipula-tors using the ILQ differential game framework for central-ized motion planning. We begin by introducing the problem definition, followed by the necessary notations and the details of our method. 

A. Problem Definition 

In an environment with N agents at time t, the state is denoted x(t), while the control signal applied to the state for all agents ranging from 1 to N is symbolized as u1: N (t).After applying control to the state over a time interval ∆t,the system evolves according to the following discrete-time system dynamics 

x(t + 1) = x(t) + f (x(t), u 1: N (t)) · ∆t (1) where f (·) is the system dynamics, which contains the dy-namics of all agents. In our problem, each agent is modeled as an m-DOF robot arm manipulator with configuration q

in the C-space Q, where q ∈ Q ⊆ Rm. The joint velocities and accelerations for each arm are denoted by ˙q ∈ Rm and 

¨q ∈ Rm, respectively. The control signal u corresponds to the acceleration of each joint among all agents. Consequently, the global state x ∈ R2mN and joint control for agent i,denoted by ui ∈ Rm, are defined as: 

x(t) = {q1: m, ˙q1: m, . . . , q N :m, ˙qN :m} (2) 

ui(t) = {¨q1, . . . , ¨qm} (3) Each agent i aims to minimize a cost functional Ji, which consists of a running cost ℓi and a termination cost ϕi.The running cost ℓi depends on all states x and the control signal u over the time horizon until T − 1. In contrast, the termination cost ϕi is evaluated only with the final state x(T )

at time T . Thus, the cost function can be expressed as 

Ji(x) =  

> T−1

X

> t=0

ℓi(x(t), u i(t)) ·∆t+ϕi(x(T )) , ∀i ∈ { 1, . . . , N }

(4) 

B. Background 

Algorithm 1 ILQ Arm solver  

> 1:

for k = 1 , 2, . . . do  

> 2:

ξk ← { x(0) , . . . , x (T )} where x(t + 1) = x(t) + 

f (x(t), u 1: N (t)) · ∆t 

> 3:

{A(t), B i(t)} ← system linearization ξk 

> 4:

{li(t), Q i(t), r ij (t), R ij (t)} ← cost quadratic ξk 

> 5:

{˜γki } ← solve LQ game A(t), B i(t), l i(t), 

> 6:

Qi(t), r ij (t), R ij (t) 

> 7:

{γki } ← strategy update {γk−1 

> i

, ˜γki } 

> 8:

if converged then  

> 9:

return {γki } 

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

end for 

Before delving into the implementation details, we first outline the overall design framework. Our goal is to compute a global Nash equilibrium in the form of time-varying state-feedback control strategies γ∗ 

> i

∈ Γi, as defined in Eq. 3 and 4. For each agent i, the strategy space Γi consists of feedback policies that map time and state to control inputs 

γi : [0 , T ] × R2mN → RmiA set of strategies {γ∗ 

> i

}Ni=1 constitutes a global Nash equilibrium if no agent can reduce its individual cost by unilaterally deviating. Formally, this is expressed as 

J∗ 

> i

= Ji(γ∗ 

> 1

, . . . , γ ∗ 

> i

, . . . , γ ∗ 

> N

)

≤ Ji(γ∗ 

> 1

, . . . , γ ∗

> i−1

, γ i, γ ∗

> i+1

, . . . , γ ∗ 

> N

) ∀i, ∀γi

(5) Computing a true global Nash equilibrium for nonlinear dynamics is generally intractable. Therefore, in practice, we seek solutions that satisfy the Nash conditions under local approximations of the dynamics and cost, leading to an ILQ game formulation. We assume that each agent observes the full system state at every time step but does not have access to the control policies of other agents. The resulting procedure for LQ game, summarized in algorithm 1, begins with an initial state x(0) and a set of initial feedback strategies {γi(0) }Ni=1 . These are run through non-linear dynamics f (·) to obtain the current trajectory ξk at iteration k (Line 2-3). To update the trajectory, we compute a Jacobian linearization of system dynamics f . We define the deviation from this trajectory δx (t) = x(t) − ˆx(t) and 

δu (t) = ui(t) − ˆui(t) for each agent i. Using this, we can approximate the linearized system (Line 4) by 

˙δx (t) ≈ A(t)δx (t) + X 

> i∈{ 0,...,N }

Bi(t)δu i(t) (6) where A(t) and B(t) are the Jacobian of state and control dynamics. Next, we compute a quadratic approximation of the cost function Ji as follows 

ℓi(x(t), u i(t)) ≈

ℓi(ˆ x(t), ˆui(t)) + 12 δx (t)T (Qi(t)δx (t) + 2 li(t)) + 12

X 

> j∈{ 0,...,N }

δu j (t)T (Rij (t)δu j (t) + 2 rij (t)) 

(7) 

ϕi(x(T )) ≈ ϕi(ˆ x(T )) + 12 δx (T )T (Qi(T )δx (T ) + 2 li(T )) 

(8) where Qi(t) and Ri(t) are the Hessians ∇2ˆxˆxℓi, ∇2ˆuˆuℓi and 

li(t) and rij (t) are the gradients ∇ˆxℓi, ∇ ˆuj ℓi (Line 5). For the goal cost, a similar approach is used, but it is computed only at the final time step T . Since there is no control input 

u at the final step, the goal cost only depends on the final state deviation δx (T ).We then solve the finite horizon LQ game, which returns a set of feedback strategies ˜Γk that constitute a Nash equi-librium for the LQ game. These optimal strategies are affine maps of the state deviation δ(t)˜γki (t, x (t)) = ˆ ui(t) − P ki (t)δx (t) − αki (t) (9) where P ki (t) is the feedback gain matrix and αki (t) is an affine term. To compute P ki (t) and αki (t), the algorithm starts at the final time T and iterates backward to t = 0 . At each time step, it solves the equilibrium of the local LQ sub-game. Since it is a general-sum game, the agents’ strategies are coupled and solved with coupled Riccati equations. However, updating strategies often leads to divergence. The LQ solution assumes the linear dynamics and quadratic costs are accurate everywhere, but for a manipulator, these approximations are only valid locally (near the current tra-jectory ξk). To address this, the algorithm introduces a step size η ∈ (0 , 1] . The actual strategy used in the update is given by (Line 8) 

γki (t, x (t)) = ˆ ui(t) − P ki (t)δx (t) − ηα ki (t) (10) With the new strategies γki , we compute the next trajectory 

ξk+1 and repeat until convergence. 

C. Our method 

In this subsection, we present the details of our design, in-cluding the collision avoidance, the running cost formulation, and the termination cost design, as specified in Eq. 4. We will then demonstrate how these components are integrated and reveal the final pipeline for solving multi-agent motion planning using our method. 

1) Collision Penalty: Our method incorporates penalties for self-collision, inter-agent collisions, and environmental obstacles to ensure valid motion planning. Unlike point-mass models used in previous work [14], robot arm manipulators require sophisticated state-dependent cost terms to enable both the safety and validity of the generated path. To prevent self-collision in an m-DOF manipulator with m + 1 links, we enforce a minimal distance between all non-adjacent link pairs (li, l j ), ensuring it is greater than a safety margin ds.The self-collision penalty σs is formulated as follows, where 

λ denotes the associated weighting coefficient 

σs(x, d s) = λs min 

> (i,j )∈{ m+1 }×{ m+1 }
> i−j> 1

(ds − dmin (li, l j )) (11) For inter-agent collisions, we model the area occupied by all links of agent i as a capsule volume ci. The inter-agent collision penalty ensures that the minimal distance between any two agents is larger than the safety margin, which can be expressed as 

σt(x, d s) = λt min   

> (i,j )∈{ N}×{ N}
> i̸=j

(ds − dmin (ci, c j )) (12) To account for environmental obstacles, we utilize aSigned Distance Function (SDF) [30] to evaluate collision penalty 

σi(x, d s) = λi min   

> i∈{ N}

(ds − dsdf ({ce}, c i)) (13) where ds(t, c i) := dist sdf (t, c i) represents the distance be-tween the manipulator and the workspace obstacles at time 

t. This formulation allows the ILQ solver to generate feasible multi-agent motion plans even in dynamic environments. 

2) Control Cost: The quadratic control cost ˜ι promotes smooth and physically feasible trajectories by penalizing excessive actuation. By minimizing the squared L2-norm of the control input, the optimizer is encouraged to distribute effort over the entire horizon instead of producing impulsive, high-amplitude commands 

˜ιi(u) = λcT −1X

> 0

∥u0: m∥22 (14) Since the cost is strictly convex with respect to u, large con-trol magnitudes are penalized disproportionately, suppressing abrupt variations in the input sequence. This indirectly yields smoother state evolution through the system dynamics. For robotic manipulators, this translates to fluid joint motions, reduced excitation of unmodeled dynamics, and improved mechanical stability. From an optimization standpoint, the quadratic control term acts as a regularizer. It contributes positive definiteness to the control Hessian, improving numerical conditioning and enabling reliable backward-pass updates in second-order methods. This stabilizes convergence and prevents ill-posed updates associated with poorly conditioned curvature. 

3) Running Cost: The previously defined collision penal-ties and control cost are combined into the running cost ℓi

from Eq. (4) as follows 

ℓi(x, u i) = σs(x, d s) + σt(x, d s)+ σi(x, d s) + ˜ ιi(u) (15) 

4) Termination Cost: Our termination cost ϕ(x) is defined as a quadratic penalty on the final state deviation in order to ensure goal reachability within a finite-time horizon. This formulation encourages the system to minimize the error between the terminal state and the desired configuration xg

ϕ(x) = 12 β∥xgi − xi(T )∥22 (16) where xg ∈ Q ⊆ Rm denotes the target joint configurations for agent i, xi(T ) is the joint angles at the final time T ,and β is a scalar weight that determines the priority of goal attainment relative to other cost components. While a running cost penalizes goal deviation throughout the entire trajectory, it often biases the solver toward a direct path, which can lead to local minima or infeasible solutions when complex obstacles are present. In contrast, defining ϕ(x) as a terminal-only penalty provides flexibility to the planner. By isolating the goal objective from the intermediate states, the optimizer can focus on collision avoidance and dynamic feasibility during the transient phase. This allows the robot to make detours or execute wide maneuvers to bypass obstacles without incurring a high cost penalty, provided it converges to the target configuration xg

by the final time T .The coupling between the termination cost and the running cost naturally induces braking behavior near the goal state 

xg . As the system approaches the target, aggressive control inputs become costly, encouraging gradual deceleration and reducing overshoot. This results in a trajectory that balances goal achievement with motion quality while maintaining dynamic consistency. (a) 4 robot cases (b) 2 robot with obstacles (c) NeHMO 2 robot cases (d) NeHMO 3 robot cases 

Fig. 2: This figure illustrates representative test scenarios, including the 4-agent setup, the 2-agent case with obstacles, and the NeHMO benchmarks with 2 and 3 agents. IV. EXPERIMENTS In this section, we present the simulation setup, the baseline comparison, the ablation studies, and the real-world experiments. 

A. Simulation Setup 

We construct six types of complex simulation scenarios to evaluate the performance of our method against the baselines in multi-agent systems operating within cluttered environments. For each scenario, we randomly generate 250 test instances for comprehensive evaluation, with T = 5 s, 

∆t = 0 .1s, and convergence threshold of 1 × 10 −1. All test cases are restricted to instances in which collisions would occur if each agent moved directly toward its target configuration. In Scenarios 1-4, manipulators were positioned uniformly along a circle with a radius of 0.6 m, with the number of agents varying from two to four. Each environment includes a ground plane as a static obstacle. Scenario 4 also incorporated multiple static obstacles to assess environmental collision-avoidance performance in confined, narrow scenes. Scenarios 5 and 6 are designed to enable direct compar-ison with the pretrained model proposed by NeHMO [25], ensuring consistency in evaluation conditions. In total, 1,500 test cases were generated for multi-agent path planning. Examples of testing instances in diverse environments are shown in Fig. 2. To quantitatively assess performance, we adopted the following evaluation metrics.  

> •

Success Rate (SR) : Success rate is defined as the percentage of valid plans in which all agents reach their Test Scenarios ILQ-Arm (Ours) Centralized CHOMP Best Response CHOMP Centralized RRT*                                                                                                                           

> SR ↑PT ↓PL ↓SR ↑PT ↓PL ↓SR ↑PT ↓PL ↓SR ↑PT ↓PL ↓
> 2 agents 96.8 0.121 10.109 89.2 5.777 34.331 44.0 94.725 34.362 62.8 15.110 23.455 3 agents 87.6 0.866 14.060 80.4 17.659 31.899 26.0 130.511 28.616 56.8 15.105 16.794 4 agents 86.0 1.954 15.767 62.0 44.726 33.039 42.4 115.353 32.445 40.8 15.101 19.921 2 agents w obs 95.2 0.585 7.893 98.8 1.698 12.78 73.6 45.425 10.541 87.6 15.103 8.665
> NeHMO Scenarios ILQ-Arm (Ours) Centralized CHOMP NeHMO Centralized RRT*
> SR ↑PT ↓PL ↓SR ↑PT ↓PL ↓SR ↑PT ↓PL ↓SR ↑PT ↓PL ↓
> 2 agents 90.8 0.217 12.387 36.0 2.896 9.146 77.0 5.304 30.442 55.2 15.107 16.799 3 agents 86.8 0.455 17.042 20.0 6.714 13.156 80.0 4.025 36.758 42.4 15.134 19.499

TABLE I: This table compares ILQ-Arm with the baseline methods. ILQ-Arm achieves the best overall performance in success rate, planning time, and path length. Centralized CHOMP performs reasonably well but is computationally expensive and scales poorly as the number of agents increases. NeHMO achieves moderate success rates but produces less efficient solutions with longer paths. In contrast, ILQ-Arm consistently scales to complex scenarios while maintaining high success rates and the lowest planning times, demonstrating its effectiveness for multi-agent rearrangement. respective goal configurations without collisions. A trial is considered a failure if it fails to complete within 120 seconds or fails to converge within 200 iterations.  

> •

Planning Time (PT) : Planning time measures the total computational time required for the planner to generate feasible trajectories.  

> •

Path Length (PL) : Path length represents the cumula-tive travel distance in radians of all agents, reflecting the quality and efficiency of the generated trajectories. 

B. Simulation Results 1) Baseline Comparison: To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed approach, we compare it against the following three baseline methods.  

> •

Centralized, CHOMP : The system is centralized by concatenating the state vectors of all agents into a single composite state space, which then uses CHOMP [27] to solve the planning problem.  

> •

Best Response, CHOMP : Each agent generates its trajectory sequentially while treating the previously planned trajectories of other agents as obstacles. This process is repeated until convergence, defined as no further updates to any agent’s trajectory.  

> •

Centralized, RRT* : The centralized formulation is identical to Centralized CHOMP, but RRT* is used as the planner instead of CHOMP. Since this method continually optimizes the plan as time allows, we set the time limit to a reasonable 15 seconds.  

> •

NeHMO : A decentralized learning-based motion plan-ner that leverages Hamilton–Jacobi reachability to en-sure inter-agent collision avoidance [25]. However, NeHMO cannot handle obstacles. Thus, to ensure a fair comparison, we evaluate our method against it using the configurations reported in the original paper, shown in Table I as the NeHMO scenarios. Table I reports results across the different test scenarios with all metrics averaged over successful instances except for success rate. In our test scenarios, Centralized CHOMP performs rea-sonably but is outperformed by ILQ-Arm in both efficiency and path quality. In the test cases with static obstacles, Centralized CHOMP achieves slightly higher success rates than ILQ-Arm. This can be attributed to its centralized formulation, which plans over the full joint state space of all agents simultaneously, inherently avoiding collisions in constrained or obstacle-rich configurations. However, this ad-vantage comes at a significant cost: planning times increase dramatically, and the resulting paths are often much longer and less efficient. Thus, while it may succeed in avoiding collisions in highly constrained environments, it does so inefficiently and lacks scalability as the number of agents increases. Decentralized CHOMP consistently struggles across all scenarios. Its sequential, best-response approach fails to maintain high success rates in both random and complex environments, particularly as agent numbers grow. Planning times are extremely high, and the generated trajectories are generally inefficient as we can see from path length data. Compared to ILQ-Arm, it demonstrates both poor reliability and poor computational efficiency. NeHMO is a decentralized, learning-based planner that uses Hamilton–Jacobi reachability to avoid inter-agent col-lisions. It achieves relatively high success rates in the given NeHMO scenarios due to its effective inter-robot collision avoidance. However, its performance is limited in several key ways. Planning times are significantly higher than those of ILQ-Arm, and the generated trajectories are substantially longer due to its reachability modeling, reflecting inefficiency in path quality. Moreover, NeHMO cannot account for static obstacles, which restricts its applicability in cluttered or confined environments. As the number of agents increases, success rates decline further, and path inefficiency becomes more pronounced, making it unsuitable for larger or more complex tasks. In conclusion, ILQ-Arm achieves the best overall balance of success rate, planning time, and path quality. Even in complex environments, it produces far shorter and more Start Configuration Waypoint1 Waypoint2 Final Configuration    

> X(0) X(1) X(2) X(3)

Fig. 3: The figure shows a multi-agent motion planning. Each key-frame illustrates the system’s motion, with the corresponding time step indicated in the upper-right corner. At way-points 1 and 2, the robots demonstrate effective inter-robot collision avoidance while simultaneously optimizing their trajectories toward the final configuration. Our ILQ-Arm finds collision free solution in 0.05 seconds, while the execution lasted 45 seconds.                                                                                  

> Test Scenarios ILQ-Arm (Ours) ILQ-Arm w/o self-collision ILQ-Arm w Pseudo-Huber ILQ-Arm w running goal
> SR ↑#CL ↓PT ↓PL ↓#CL ↓PT ↓PL ↓SR ↑PT ↓PL ↓SR ↑PT ↓PL ↓
> 2 agents 86.4 00.659 7.668 31 0.0950 7.649 86.4 0.656 7.668 74.4 1.689 9.154 3 agents 78.4 01.734 14.206 17 1.123 14.177 74.0 1.713 14.177 25.2 7.408 15.160 4 agents 84.0 02.287 14.906 16 1.466 14.907 82.8 2.781 14.909 37.6 8.414 17.590 2 agents w obs 86.4 01.343 7.910 19 0.545 7.943 86.4 1.304 7.910 67.6 1.480 9.277

TABLE II: The ablation study highlights the importance of the control cost, terminal goal cost, and self-collision penalty in multi-agent motion planning. Removing the self-collision term reduces computation time but eliminates collision-free guarantees, making the planner unsafe for real-world use. Overall, the full ILQ-Arm formulation achieves the best balance of success rate, collision avoidance, planning time, and path length. These results demonstrate that all cost components are necessary for reliable, efficient, and dynamically consistent motion planning. efficient paths in a fraction of the time. This demonstrates that ILQ-Arm not only scales effectively with agent number and environment complexity but also maintains high effi-ciency, making it practical and robust for multi-agent motion planning tasks. 

2) Ablation Studies: We conduct ablation studies to val-idate the effectiveness of our design choices and to analyze performance sensitivity on manipulator systems. The follow-ing variants are evaluated.  

> •

ILQ-Arm without self-collision penalty : In this vari-ant, the self-collision penalty is removed to evaluate its significance. Previous models often ignored self-collision due to their simplicity or 2D assumptions, but for high-DoF manipulators, this component may critically impact safety and trajectory feasibility.  

> •

ILQ-Arm with Pseudo-Huber control cost : We re-placed quadratic control with a Pseudo-Huber loss. Since the Pseudo-Huber function transitions from quadratic behavior near the origin to approximately linear growth for larger inputs, this experiment exam-ines how altering the control penalty structure affects convergence and trajectory behavior.  

> •

ILQ-Arm with running goal cost : The goal cost is formulated as a running cost ℓi, rather than a terminal cost ϕi. This will continuously penalize deviations from motion toward the goal throughout the trajectory. The quantitative results are summarized in Table II, where CL denotes the total number of self-collisions in the final trajectories. These test cases are more complicated than those used in Table I, as we want to comprehensively reveal the performance differences between the variations. From Table II, we can see that removing the self-collision penalty significantly reduces planning time across all sce-narios due to the simplified objective. However, it leads to frequent collisions. This confirms that, although computa-tionally cheaper, the planner becomes unsafe and unreliable without explicit self-collision modeling. In addition, replacing the quadratic control cost with a Pseudo-Huber loss produces comparable success rates and path lengths in simpler settings, such as the 2-agent case. However, as the number of agents increases, the quadratic formulation consistently achieves higher success rates and more stable convergence. This suggests that the stronger curvature of the quadratic penalty improves numerical con-ditioning and stabilizes the backward pass in the LQ game iterations. Finally, formulating the goal cost as a running term sub-stantially degrades performance. Success rates drop sharply in multi-agent scenarios, and both planning time and path length increase. This indicates that distributing goal pressure uniformly across the horizon interferes with coordinated multi-agent negotiation, whereas a goal formulation better preserves flexibility during intermediate motion. Overall, the full ILQ-Arm formulation achieves zero colli-sions while maintaining high success rates, competitive plan-ning times, and short path lengths across all test scenarios. These results demonstrate that each cost component plays a complementary role, and their combination yields the most balanced and robust performance. 

C. Real Robot Experiments 

We deploy our ILQ-Arm on a multi-agent system com-posed of two UR5e robots placed 0.8 m apart from each other. We conducted a total of four inter-robot collision avoidance tasks and one with the static obstacles to verify the real-world performance of our approach. One example can be found in Fig. 1, where two robots navigate through narrow environments avoiding static obstacles and inter-robot collisions. Another example is shown in Fig. 3. The two robots avoid inter-robot collision while optimizing their own cost function. During the experiment, our method succeeds in solving all cases with an average planning time of 0.475 seconds and an average execution time of 64 seconds. In the generated plan, the robots perform synchronized actions for each time step by following the solved states, successfully avoiding all collisions, and eventually reaching the goal. V. CONCLUSIONS This paper presents a differential game framework for multi-agent motion planning among multiple high-DoF robotic manipulators. By formulating multi-arm coordination as an ILQ game, the proposed method computes time-varying state feedback Nash strategies that naturally capture the strategic coupling among manipulators. The framework integrates differentiable self-collision and inter-arm collision penalties directly into the second-order optimization pipeline, enabling safe and coordinated motion generation without imposing fixed priority rules. Through extensive simulation studies on challenging multi-arm scenarios, we demonstrate that the approach produces smooth, dynamically consistent, and collision-aware trajectories while maintaining compu-tational efficiency. Compared with conventional centralized optimization and decoupled planning strategies, the game-theoretic structure better captures interactive behaviors and leads to more balanced coordination among agents. REFERENCES [1] Mehmet R Dogar and Siddhartha S Srinivasa. A planning frame-work for non-prehensile manipulation under clutter and uncertainty. 

Autonomous Robots , 33(3):217–236, 2012. [2] J¨ org Kr¨ uger, Terje K Lien, and Alexander Verl. Cooperation of human and machines in assembly lines. CIRP annals , 58(2):628–646, 2009. [3] Peter R Wurman, Raffaello D’Andrea, and Mick Mountz. Coordinat-ing hundreds of cooperative, autonomous vehicles in warehouses. AI magazine , 29(1):9–9, 2008. [4] Hanwen Ren, Junyong Kim, Aathman Tharmasanthiran, and Ahmed H Qureshi. Multi-agent monte carlo tree search for makespan-efficient object rearrangement in cluttered spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.02411 , 2026. [5] Peter Kazanzides, Zihan Chen, Anton Deguet, Gregory S Fischer, Russell H Taylor, and Simon P DiMaio. An open-source research kit for the da vinci® surgical system. In 2014 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA) , pages 6434–6439. IEEE, 2014. [6] Jim Mainprice and Dmitry Berenson. Human-robot collaborative manipulation planning using early prediction of human motion. In 

2013 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , pages 299–306. IEEE, 2013. [7] Abhinav K Keshari, Hanwen Ren, and Ahmed H Qureshi. Cograsp: 6-dof grasp generation for human-robot collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03173 , 2022. [8] Jaime F Fisac, Eli Bronstein, Elis Stefansson, Dorsa Sadigh, S Shankar Sastry, and Anca D Dragan. Hierarchical game-theoretic planning for autonomous vehicles. In 2019 International conference on robotics and automation (ICRA) , pages 9590–9596. IEEE, 2019. [9] Rufus Isaacs. Differential games: a mathematical theory with ap-plications to warfare and pursuit, control and optimization . Courier Corporation, 1999. [10] Ian M Mitchell, Alexandre M Bayen, and Claire J Tomlin. Atime-dependent hamilton-jacobi formulation of reachable sets for continuous dynamic games. IEEE Transactions on automatic control ,50(7):947–957, 2005. [11] David Fridovich-Keil, Vicenc Rubies-Royo, and Claire J Tomlin. An iterative quadratic method for general-sum differential games with feedback linearizable dynamics. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 2216–2222. IEEE, 2020. [12] Tamer Bas ¸ar and Geert Jan Olsder. Dynamic noncooperative game theory . SIAM, 1998. [13] Jacob Engwerda. LQ dynamic optimization and differential games .John Wiley & Sons, 2005. [14] David Fridovich-Keil, Ellis Ratner, Lasse Peters, Anca D Dragan, and Claire J Tomlin. Efficient iterative linear-quadratic approximations for nonlinear multi-player general-sum differential games. In 2020 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA) , pages 1475–1481. IEEE, 2020. [15] Sertac Karaman and Emilio Frazzoli. Sampling-based algorithms for optimal motion planning. The international journal of robotics research , 30(7):846–894, 2011. [16] John Schulman, Yan Duan, Jonathan Ho, Alex Lee, Ibrahim Awwal, Henry Bradlow, Jia Pan, Sachin Patil, Ken Goldberg, and Pieter Abbeel. Motion planning with sequential convex optimization and convex collision checking. The International Journal of Robotics Research , 33(9):1251–1270, 2014. [17] Paolo Fiorini and Zvi Shiller. Motion planning in dynamic environ-ments using velocity obstacles. The international journal of robotics research , 17(7):760–772, 1998. [18] Jur Van den Berg, Ming Lin, and Dinesh Manocha. Reciprocal velocity obstacles for real-time multi-agent navigation. In 2008 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation , pages 1928– 1935. Ieee, 2008. [19] Basil Kouvaritakis and Mark Cannon. Model predictive control. 

Switzerland: Springer International Publishing , 38(13-56):7, 2016. [20] Javier Alonso-Mora, Stuart Baker, and Daniela Rus. Multi-robot formation control and object transport in dynamic environments via constrained optimization. The International Journal of Robotics Research , 36(9):1000–1021, 2017. [21] Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Darrell, and Pieter Abbeel. End-to-end training of deep visuomotor policies. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 17(39):1–40, 2016. [22] Aaron D Ames, Xiangru Xu, Jessy W Grizzle, and Paulo Tabuada. Control barrier function based quadratic programs for safety critical systems. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , 62(8):3861–3876, 2016. [23] Jaime F Fisac, Anayo K Akametalu, Melanie N Zeilinger, Shahab Kaynama, Jeremy Gillula, and Claire J Tomlin. A general safety framework for learning-based control in uncertain robotic systems. 

IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , 64(7):2737–2752, 2018. [24] Somil Bansal, Mo Chen, Sylvia Herbert, and Claire J Tomlin. Hamilton-jacobi reachability: A brief overview and recent advances. In 2017 IEEE 56th annual conference on decision and control (CDC) ,pages 2242–2253. IEEE, 2017. [25] Qingyi Chen and Ahmed H Qureshi. Nehmo: Neural hamilton-jacobi reachability learning for decentralized safe multi-agent motion planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.13940 , 2025. [26] John T Betts. Survey of numerical methods for trajectory optimization. 

Journal of guidance, control, and dynamics , 21(2):193–207, 1998. [27] Nathan Ratliff, Matt Zucker, J Andrew Bagnell, and Siddhartha Srini-vasa. Chomp: Gradient optimization techniques for efficient motion planning. In 2009 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation , pages 489–494. IEEE, 2009. [28] Yuval Tassa, Tom Erez, and Emanuel Todorov. Synthesis and stabi-lization of complex behaviors through online trajectory optimization. In 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , pages 4906–4913. IEEE, 2012. [29] Grady Williams, Nolan Wagener, Brian Goldfain, Paul Drews, James M Rehg, Byron Boots, and Evangelos A Theodorou. Informa-tion theoretic mpc for model-based reinforcement learning. In 2017 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA) ,pages 1714–1721. IEEE, 2017. [30] James A Sethian et al. Level set methods and fast marching methods ,volume 98. Cambridge Cambridge UP, 1999.