Title: Communication-Constrained Multi-Robot Exploration With Adaptive Communication Windows

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.12502v1

Published Time: Mon, 14 Sep 2026 00:38:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Communication-Constrained Multi-Robot Exploration With Adaptive Communication Windows 

Ben Rossano 1,3, Jaein Lim 2, Jonathan P. How 1

Abstract — Exploring unknown environments with multi-robot teams can improve efficiency by allowing robots to explore in parallel. However, realizing these gains requires effective in-formation sharing. When communication is intermittent, robots must balance the benefits of sharing information against the cost of diverting from exploration to establish communication. This paper introduces MACE, a decentralized exploration framework that actively evaluates whether establishing commu-nication is worthwhile. At scheduled communication windows, robots estimate the cost of reaching previously identified com-munication locations. By formulating this decision as a variant of the Vehicle Orienteering Problem, robots evaluate routes based on the travel required to establish communication and the exploration that can be completed along the way. This approach enables robots to communicate more frequently than under purely opportunistic strategies while reducing the unnecessary travel associated with fixed rendezvous strategies. Across a set of simulated environments with varying size and geometry, we demonstrate that MACE reduces the total exploration time by up to 23% compared to existing communication-constrained exploration strategies. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

The goal of autonomous exploration is to navigate through an unknown environment to maximally gain information, ei-ther within a fixed time or until complete coverage [1]. Multi-robot teams are particularly well-suited for these tasks as they can parallelize the exploration process, achieving efficiency gains that single robots cannot match. Realizing these gains, however, requires intelligent coordination strategies to avoid redundant coverage, which occurs when a robot unknowingly re-explores an area that a teammate has already covered. One prominent line of work assumes that robots maintain continuous communication, allowing each robot to access the latest information available to the entire team and enabling exploration in a fully coordinated fashion [2]. While these approaches yield high exploration efficiency, the assump-tion of constant, reliable communication frequently breaks down in practice. In environments without global network infrastructure, such as tunnel systems, urban areas expe-riencing communication outages, and unstructured outdoor terrain, robots must instead form mobile ad-hoc networks (MANETs) to communicate directly with one another [3]. However, limited mobile radio range and signal attenuation  

> 1B. Rossano and J.P. How are with the Aerospace Controls Lab, Mas-sachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA

{brossano, jhow }@mit.edu  

> 2J. Lim is with the Charles Stark Draper Laboratory, Cambridge, MA, USA

jlim@draper.com            

> 3B. Rossano is aDraper Scholar with the Charles Stark Draper Laboratory, Cambridge, MA. The authors would like to thank the Draper Scholars program for supporting this work.

Fig. 1: Overview of MACE’s communication-aware explo-ration strategy. When robots establish communication, they update points for future communication. Later on, the robots determine the cost of traveling back to these points through a route of frontiers to establish communication. through materials such as concrete and metal make con-tinuous team-wide connectivity difficult to sustain without significantly constraining coverage. As a result, multi-robot exploration under intermittent communication has emerged as an important research chal-lenge, motivating strategies that enable effective exploration without constant connectivity [4]. Existing work falls broadly into two categories. Rendezvous-based strategies designate specific times and locations for robots to meet and share information, actively enforcing map consistency to mitigate redundant exploration [5]. However, rendezvous locations must be selected using limited knowledge of the environment and may become poorly positioned as exploration progresses, forcing robots to make long detours through previously-explored space. On the other hand, opportunistic strategies do not coordi-nate meetings. Instead, robots share information only when they happen to encounter one another, relying on information from prior contacts to guide their exploration policies in between encounters [6]. While this avoids the shortcomings of mandatory meetings, robots that go long periods with-out contact are more prone to redundant exploration. The limitations of these strategies motivate a solution approach that more intelligently trades off exploration progress and information exchange. In this work, we present MACE (Multi-robot Adaptive Communication-constrained Exploration), a decentralized arXiv:2609.12502v1 [cs.RO] 11 Sep 2026 framework that combines scheduled communication win-dows with intelligent evaluation of whether communication is worth pursuing. During a communication window, rather than committing to a rendezvous, each robot performs a rollout to estimate the cost of establishing communication with its teammates based on previously determined com-munication locations. By formulating this as a variant of the Vehicle Orienteering Problem (VOP), robots estimate the “detour cost” of attempting communication—specifically, how far away a potential meeting point is and how much exploration can be conducted en route to it. If this cost is low, the robot attempts to establish communication. Otherwise, it continues exploring and re-evaluates at the next window. This approach preserves the structure of rendezvous-based strategies by scheduling dedicated opportunities for com-munication, but removes the requirement that robots attend meetings regardless of cost. Since communication attempts are only made when the cost is low, their impact on ex-ploration efficiency is limited, while the regularly scheduled communication windows produce more frequent information exchange than purely opportunistic methods. Our work can be summarized by the following contributions:  

> •

We propose MACE, a decentralized multi-robot explo-ration framework that balances exploration efficiency with active communication awareness under intermittent connectivity constraints.  

> •

We evaluate MACE against two baseline approaches across a set of simulated environments, ranging in size and geometry. Our results demonstrate that MACE’s communication-aware exploration approach can de-crease the total time needed to explore an environment by up to 23%.  

> •

We analyze how environment size and geometry influ-ence the performance of different exploration strategies using multiple graph-based connectivity metrics. II. B ACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 

A. Frontier Exploration 

Frontier exploration is the process of traveling to bound-aries between known and unknown space to increase a robot’s knowledge of the environment [7]. The primary challenge of this process is determining which frontiers to visit to maximize exploration efficiency. Previous work has extensively investigated different methods for defining the utility of a frontier, including proximity to the robot, expected information gain, and spread relative to teammates [8]. One common frontier selection approach is to greedily assign each robot the highest-scoring available frontier, re-planning each time a new frontier is reached with updated information [9]. While this enables quick replanning, it can be susceptible to the standard myopic behavior of greedy planning. Other approaches instead plan sequences of frontiers rather than individual targets [10], [11]. However, planning sequences of frontiers does not always provide additional value, since the frontier set changes continuously as new regions are discovered through exploration. 

B. Connectivity-Constrained Methods 

Connectivity-constrained approaches maintain team-wide connectivity throughout the mission, ensuring that infor-mation is shared continuously [2], [12], [13]. While this eliminates redundant exploration, it can reduce efficiency by limiting how spread out the team explores, especially in large or geometrically complex environments. Despite these limitations, connectivity-constrained approaches introduce solution techniques that remain relevant in our setting. In particular, the problem of positioning a multi-robot team to satisfy connectivity can be reframed to identify good meeting locations for a disconnected team. In [14], [15], this problem is formalized using connected subgraph optimization, en-abling existing graph solvers to identify locations that satisfy communication constraints. 

C. Rendezvous-Based Methods 

Rendezvous-based approaches schedule designated times for robots to meet and exchange information, guaranteeing that robots share information at regular intervals. Some meth-ods require the full team to rendezvous at each scheduled event [16], while others optimize a schedule of pairwise or subteam meetings, allowing some robots to continue exploring while others communicate [5], [17]. Scheduled communication provides a reliable mechanism for information exchange but introduces a fundamental plan-ning challenge: at the time of each meeting, robots must select a location for the next rendezvous without knowing where exploration will take them in the interim. Common rendezvous selection approaches, such as the center of mass of current frontiers [18] or a randomly sampled frontier [5], tend to become poor strategies by the time the next ren-dezvous arrives, as robots push deeper into unknown space and the frontier boundaries shift substantially. Recent work leverages learned map predictions to make more informed estimates of what lies beyond current frontiers, which could prove to be useful for rendezvous selection [19]. 

D. Opportunistic Methods 

Opportunistic approaches do not rely on fixed meeting schedules, instead allowing robots to share information whenever they encounter one another by chance [6], [20]. This avoids the backtracking costs inherent to rendezvous-based methods, since robots are not regularly diverting from exploration to satisfy pre-committed meetings. However, without any mechanism to enforce encounters, robots may go extended periods without communicating, which can lead to redundant exploration. Recent work has introduced pursuit-based communication [11], in which a robot can actively seek out teammates using its last known estimate of their positions and intended plans. While this may increase the likelihood of communication, stale knowledge can also be a poor predictor of a robot’s actual location, particularly as robots push further into un-known space. Thus, pursuit may also promote redundant exploration in certain envirornments. III. P ROBLEM FORMULATION 

We consider a team of N robots R = {1, 2, . . . , N }

tasked with collaboratively exploring an unknown bounded environment W ⊂ R2. Each robot i ∈ R maintains an occupancy-grid map mi : W → { free , occupied , unknown }

that it updates from onboard range measurements as it moves. The frontier set Fi ⊂ W is defined as the boundary between free and unknown cells in mi. For planning purposes, each frontier f ∈ F i is represented by a single 2D coordinate, chosen as the location of the free-space cell closest to the frontier’s centroid. The team objective is to cover the explorable portion of W in the minimum cumulative time. When two robots are in communication, they exchange their local maps and share their future intentions. We assume that each robot can localize itself perfectly within the envi-ronment and accurately map its surroundings. Under these assumptions, map fusion becomes straightforward as the local maps can be directly aligned and merged, with priority given to occupied cells. Furthermore, each robot i maintains, for every other robot j, a plan p(i) 

> j

= ( ˆf (i) 

> j

, ˆq(i) 

> j

, t (i) 

> j

) storing the next frontier ˆf that robot j intends to pursue, a larger region ˆq that robot j has been assigned to explore, and the timestamp t at which this information was received. This allows robots to propagate knowledge about one another through indirect encounters, always preferring the most re-cent information. Each robot also stores a set of communication points Cij ,which are locations such that communication between robots 

i and j is guaranteed if both robots are present simultane-ously. Formally, for a pair (i, j ) and some communication model, we seek a set of points Cij ⊂ W such that 

∀ wa, w b ∈ C ij , inComms (wa, w b) = true , (1) where inComms () returns true if a pair of points satisfies the communication model (e.g., line-of-sight, disk). Thus, if robot i travels to any point in Cij at some scheduled communication time tcij , and robot j does the same, commu-nication will be re-established. We introduce two additional parameters that influence opportunities for communication: (i) the communication interval ∆c governs how long after the current encounter the next tcij is scheduled, and (ii) the lookahead horizon δ controls how soon before tcij robot i

begins its communication-aware planning (Section IV-C). IV. M ETHOD 

MACE consists of three primary components: de-fault exploration, communication point updates, and communication-aware exploration. Algorithm 1 outlines the high-level planning strategy executed by a single robot i.At each timestep, if communication with any teammate is available, the robots exchange local information, including maps and planned intentions. If the change in the map since the previous update exceeds a threshold ∆m, the robots update their assigned high-level exploration regions (Algorithm 2), advance the next communication opportunity time tcij , and update Cij (Algorithm 3). 

Algorithm 1 Robot i Exploration Strategy  

> 1:

t ← 0 

> 2:

mi, m prev , τ i, π i ← ∅ , ∅, ∅, ∅ 

> 3:

tcij ← ∆c, missed ij ← 0, Cij ← ∅ , p (i) 

> j

← ∅ ∀j ∈ R \ { i} 

> 4:

Fi ← FIND FRONTIERS (mi) 

> 5:

while |F i| > 0 do  

> 6:

S ←  j : j ∈ R \ { i}, IN COMMS (pos i, pos j ) 

> 7:

if |S| > 0 then  

> 8:

mi, p (i) ← FUSE INFO (S) 

> 9:

if DIFF (mi, m prev ) > ∆m then  

> 10:

Fi ← FIND FRONTIERS (mi) 

> 11:

p(i) ← UPDATE REGIONS (Fi, p(i), S, i) 

> 12:

tcij ← t + ∆ c, missed ij ← 0 ∀j ∈ S  

> 13:

Cij ← UPDATE COMM POINTS (Fi, p (i), i, j )

∀j ∈ S  

> 14:

mprev ← mi, τ i ← ∅  

> 15:

end if  

> 16:

end if  

> 17:

if τi = ∅ then  

> 18:

Fi ← FIND FRONTIERS (mi) 

> 19:

if ∃ j : t > t cij − δ then  

> 20:

σ ← SOLVE ORIENTEERING (Fi, Cij , t cij − t) 

> 21:

if σ valid then  

> 22:

τi ← σ0 

> 23:

end if  

> 24:

end if  

> 25:

if τi = ∅ then  

> 26:

if CLOSEST FRONTIER (Fi, p (i)) > d f then  

> 27:

p(i) ← UPDATE REGIONS (Fi, p(i), {i}, i) 

> 28:

end if  

> 29:

τi ← arg max f ∈F i Ufront i (f, ˆf (i)) 

> 30:

end if  

> 31:

πi ← AS TAR (pos i, τ i, m i) 

> 32:

end if  

> 33:

if t > t cij then  

> 34:

tcij ← t + ∆ c 

> 35:

missed ij ← missed ij + 1  

> 36:

end if  

> 37:

pos i ← FOLLOW PATH (πi) 

> 38:

if pos i = τi then  

> 39:

τi ← ∅  

> 40:

end if  

> 41:

t ← t + 1  

> 42:

end while 

Whenever a new frontier target is required, either because the robot has reached its current target τi or because the exploration regions have been updated, the robot checks whether any teammate’s scheduled communication oppor-tunity occurs within the time horizon δ. If such an op-portunity exists, the robot selects the teammate that it has been out of communication with the longest and invokes the communication-aware orienteering solver (Section IV-C). If a feasible route exists, this solver returns a chain σ of frontier waypoints terminating at a point in Cij , subject to the remaining time budget tcij − t, and the first waypoint 

σ0 becomes the new frontier target. If the solver does not return a feasible chain, the robot checks whether there are any feasible communication opportunities with other robots. When no communication-aware window is active or the solver does not find any feasible chain, the robot falls back to the default exploration strategy. A path πi is then planned with A* search. If the current time surpasses a scheduled communication opportunity, the event is treated as a missed communication opportunity, and the next opportunity is rescheduled to occur ∆c time steps later. Although not explicitly described in Algorithm 1, we implement a mandatory rendezvous fallback mechanism in which robots are forced to rendezvous at Cij after a large number of missed opportunities. This threshold is offset across different robot pairs to ensure that a robot is not simultaneously required to attend mandatory rendezvous with multiple teammates. 

A. Default Exploration 

Our default exploration consists of a hierarchical strategy where each robot first gets assigned an exploration region and then greedily selects frontier targets given that region. 

1) Exploration Region Selection: Let qi denote robot i’s current exploration region, and let Qi be the candidate region set. This set is computed by clustering nearby individual frontiers and finding the centroid of each. Robots may update their exploration regions under two conditions: (i) robots are in communication with other robots and their fused map is sufficiently different from the map used during the previous region update, or (ii) a robot has explored all frontiers within 

df of the region centroid. For a robot i and candidate region 

q ∈ Q i, the utility is defined as: 

Uregion i (q, ˆq(i)) = − αd di(q) + αg gi(q) + αs si(q, ˆq(i)), (2) where di, gi, and si denote the normalized travel distance, expected information gain, and coverage spread, respectively, and αd, α g , α s ≥ 0 are their associated weighting coef-ficients. The travel term is the normalized minimum path distance from the robot’s position to the region centroid on the current free-space map, computed for all centroids by a single Dijkstra pass on mi. The information-gain term estimates the unknown area that will be revealed at the frontiers of this region, which is approximated using ray-casting to simulate LiDAR coverage at each frontier location. Lastly, the spread term penalizes regions that lie too close to any region already claimed by another robot, encouraging the team to disperse across the environment: 

si(q, ˆq(i)) ≈ min  

> ˆqj∈ˆq(i)

∥q − ˆqj ∥2. (3) All distance terms are normalized by the maximum distance over the corresponding candidate set. When robots are in communication during an exploration region update, a greedy auction over regions is conducted as described in Algorithm 2. This is implemented by electing one robot to compute the solution and broadcast the resulting assignments back to the other robots in S—the subteam of robots currently in communication. The previously selected regions for robots in S are first removed from the set of active regions ˆq(S), allowing the communicating robots to revise their assignments using the newly fused information. During each round, the winning robot and region are selected, where 

bk denotes robot k’s largest bid on any available region. Updating ˆq(S) between rounds ensures that subsequent bid-ders are repelled from already-claimed regions, yielding a 

Algorithm 2 Exploration Region Greedy Assignment  

> 1:

procedure UPDATE REGIONS (FS , p (S), S, i ) 

> 2:

QS ← MERGE FRONTIER REGIONS (FS ) 

> 3:

ˆq(S) =  ˆq (S) 

> j

: j ∈ R , ˆq (S)

> j

̸ = ∅ 

> 4:

ˆq(S) 

> k

← ∅ ∀k ∈ S  

> 5:

Srem ← S  

> 6:

while Srem ̸ = ∅ do  

> 7:

for k ∈ S rem do  

> 8:

bk ← max q∈Q S Uregion k

 q, ˆq(S) 

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

k∗ ← arg max k∈S rem bk 

> 11:

q∗ ← arg max q∈Q S Uregion k∗

 q, ˆq(S) 

> 12:

ˆq(S) 

> k∗

← q∗ 

> 13:

Srem ← S rem \ { k∗} 

> 14:

end while  

> 15:

p(S) ← UPDATE PLANS (ˆq(S)) 

> 16:

return p(S) 

> 17:

end procedure 

Algorithm 3 Updating Communication Points  

> 1:

procedure UPDATE COMM POINTS (Fi, p (i), i, j ) 

> 2:

Q ← MERGE FRONTIER REGIONS (Fi) 

> 3:

¯ci, ¯cj ← CLUSTER ACROSS TEAM (Q, p(i)) 

> 4:

Gmove , G comm ← GET PLANNING GRAPHS ()  

> 5:

Cij ← SOLVE COMM POINTS (Gcomm , G move , {¯ci, ¯cj }) 

> 6:

return Cij  

> 7:

end procedure 

spatially spread allocation. Each robot then updates its known plans based on the results of the auction and the current timestamp. When a robot performs an individual update (Algorithm 1, Line 27), the procedure is the same, although 

S = {i}, which removes the auction aspect of the selection. 

2) Frontier Selection: Once robot i has been assigned an exploration region qi, it must select a specific frontier to visit next. For a candidate frontier f ∈ F i, the utility is defined as: 

Ufront i (f, ˆf (i)) = − βd di(f ) + βg gi(f ) − βr ri(f )+ βs si(f, ˆf (i)), (4) where di, gi, ri, and si denote the normalized travel dis-tance, expected information gain, region alignment, and coverage spread, respectively, and βd, β g , β r , β s ≥ 0 are their associated weighting coefficients. The travel term and information-gain term are defined as in Eq. (2). The spread term si(f, ˆf (i)) penalizes frontiers near any already-claimed frontiers, with the same form as Eq. (3). The region-alignment term ri(f ) couples frontier selection with the coarse exploration region assignment by compar-ing two path distances: the robot-to-region distance di(qi)

and the frontier-to-region distance d(f, q i). The quantity 

di(qi) − d(f, q i) captures how much visiting f reduces the remaining distance to qi. This encourages exploration toward the assigned region without forcing the robot to ignore frontiers encountered along the way. 

B. Updating Communication Points 

Algorithm 3 describes the procedure for updating the communication points Cij . The procedure first clusters the (a) Maze ( 250 × 250 m) (b) Tunnels ( 500 × 350 m) (c) Modified Tunnels ( 500 × 350 m) (d) Urban ( 600 × 500 m) 

Fig. 2: Simulated maps used for testing communication-constrained exploration. The maps range in size and geometric structure. The red boxes indicate additions made to existing maps. current frontiers of the fused map into exploration regions Q,providing a coarse partition of the unexplored space. These regions are then distributed across the entire team through a process that assigns unclaimed regions to the robot k with the nearest claimed region qk, using the last known information for any robots not currently in communication. With |R| 

clusters, aggregate centroids ¯ck ∀k ∈ R are then computed to summarize the area each robot is expected to cover. To facilitate efficient planning, we abstract the known free space into two dynamically updated graphs: a movement graph Gmove = ( V, E move ), encoding traversability, and a communication graph Gcomm = ( V, E comm ), encoding which pairs of locations can establish communication. The graphs share the same vertex set V but differ in their edges. For a robot pair (i, j ), the cluster centroids ˆci, ˆcj are first snapped to their nearest vertices in V . The communication points solver then searches for a pair of vertices vi, v j ∈ V that minimizes the maximum travel distance from each centroid subject to the pair being connected in Gcomm :

min   

> vi,v j∈V

max  

> k∈{ i,j }

dmove (ˆ ck, v k)

subject to (vi, v j ) ∈ Ecomm ,

(5) where dmove denotes shortest-path distance in Gmove . This is solved via an optimal wavefront search that expands outward from each centroid until a pair of vertices connected by an edge in Gcomm is found. The set Cij is then defined by sampling points along vivj such that inComms () returns true. This set forms the spatial axis, or corridor, along which robot i can plan to re-establish contact with robot j at the next communication opportunity. 

C. Communication-Aware Exploration 

The communication-aware planner is formulated as abudgeted Vehicle Orienteering Problem (VOP) in which a robot must travel from a source (its current position) to a sink (any point in Cij ) within a time budget B = tcij − t.The candidate node set is the frontier set Fi, where each frontier f is assigned a prize equal to Ufront i from Eq. (4) with the travel distance term removed, since travel cost is already represented explicitly through edge weights in the VOP. The planner constructs a distance matrix over the node set {pos i} ∪ F i ∪ C ij , using a batch of Dijkstra searches on 

Gmove . The resulting prizes, distances, and budget are then passed to OR-Tools to solve for a near-optimal route. If no feasible route exists, typically because no commu-nication point is reachable within B, the planner checks whether Cij is reachable with an added slack time ∆tslack 

such that the robot arrives near t cij . Since plans are executed in a receding-horizon fashion, this handles the case where the robot has already committed to its last viable frontier and simply needs to proceed to Cij . If Cij is not reachable either, the planner falls back to the default exploration strategy. Since this formulation does not include a lower-bound budget constraint, the solver may propose a chain of frontiers with an arrival to Cij earlier than the scheduled tcij . This is an intentional design choice. In exploration, new information is continuously revealed, so effective behavior depends on frequent replanning based on the latest available knowledge. A route that exactly consumes the available budget on the current map is unlikely to remain the best route as exploration progresses, since newly discovered regions may reveal frontiers that are more valuable than those originally selected. As a result, the planner re-solves the orienteering problem after each visited frontier. V. S IMULATION AND RESULTS 

A. Simulation Setup 

To evaluate the performance of MACE, we conduct sev-eral simulated experiments across four structurally distinct environments (Fig. 2): a small-scale maze-like environment [21] ( 250 × 250 m), a medium-scale tunnel network [11] (500 × 350 m), a modified version of the tunnel network with additional connectivity ( 500 × 350 m), and a large-scale urban neighborhood [5] ( 600 × 500 m). These environments vary in both size and structural connectivity (i.e., the number of interconnected passages and navigation bottlenecks). For each map, 20 starting locations are randomly sampled from free space, and each trial runs until the team achieves at least 99% shared map coverage, defined as the fraction of free cells simultaneously known to all robots. Each trial deploys three robots with a LiDAR range of 200 m and line-of-sight (LOS) constrained communication. To account for the differing spatial scales of each en-vironment, ∆c and δ are modified to reflect the relative time required to traverse each environment. Similarly, region utility weights, frontier utility weights, and clustering pa-rameters are adjusted proportionally to the map size. Lastly, when a robot chooses to seek communication and arrives (a) Maze (b) Tunnels (c) Modified Tunnels (d) Urban 

Fig. 3: Results for the mean, minimum, and maximum exploration time subject to line-of-sight communication. MACE consistently outperforms the two baseline approaches, demonstrating its robustness to different types of environments and starting locations. at a communication point near the scheduled tcij , it waits for a duration proportional to ∆tslack before abandoning the communication point to accommodate robots that were routed to arrive at slightly different times. 

B. Baselines 

We benchmark MACE against two baseline approaches:  

> •

Rendezvous (inspired by [18]): At each scheduled interval, the team convenes at a fixed rendezvous point defined as the center of mass of all frontier centroids observed at the previous rendezvous event. To account for travel time to and from the rendezvous location, which can be substantial in larger environments, we add a buffer to each exploration phase such that robots have approximately ∆c time steps of true exploration between consecutive rendezvous events. During the exploration phase, this baseline uses the same default exploration approach as MACE to ensure a fair comparison of the communication strategy rather than the frontier selection policy.  

> •

Opportunistic : This approach does not use any rendezvous scheduling or communication-aware navigation. Robots explore independently using the same default exploration approach as MACE and operate under the assumption that communication will occur by chance as robots come within range and LOS of one another during exploration. 

C. Exploration Results 

Fig. 3 depicts the mean, minimum, and maximum ex-ploration finish times across the four maps, with each map shown for all trials (top) and the worst 25% of trials (bottom). MACE achieves better performance than both baselines in all environments. Notably, when evaluating the worst 25% of trials, the performance gap between MACE and the opportunistic approach increases by up to 13.6%, demon-strating that MACE is robust to various starting locations while the opportunistic approach is more prone to redundant exploration. On the other hand, the gap between MACE and the rendezvous-based approach does not change significantly when evaluating the worst 25% of trials. These results are in part due to MACE’s fallback rendezvous mechanism after a large number of missed communication opportunities, which prevents it from degrading to the worst-case redundant exploration that the opportunistic approach suffers from. Fig. 4 illustrates two measures of team knowledge over time: global knowledge, E1 ∪ E2 ∪ E3, denoting the union of all robots’ local exploration E regardless of whether it has been shared, and shared knowledge, E1 ∩ E2 ∩ E3,denoting the intersection of all robots’ local exploration. Across all four environments, the rendezvous-based approach tends to lead in shared knowledge for much of the trial, but consistently lags in global knowledge, illustrating the coverage cost of regular backtracking to rendezvous. The curves for MACE and the opportunistic method follow a similar trajectory overall, though MACE avoids the long late-stage plateaus caused by redundant exploration. 

D. Map Connectivity 

To better understand how environment structure influences the performance of different exploration strategies, we ana-lyze each map using graph-based connectivity metrics. One such metric is current-flow betweenness (CFB) [22]. By treating each map as a circuit, CFB measures how much current passes through each edge, highlighting corridors and junctions that play a central role in connecting the environ-ment. Fig. 5 highlights the edges in the top 5% of CFB values within each environment. From the original tunnel network to the modified tunnel network, the magnitude of CFB drops significantly because the additional connections provide alternative paths that distribute flow away from the main junctions. Likewise, the largest CFB values in both the (a) Maze (b) Tunnels (c) Modified Tunnels (d) Urban 

Fig. 4: Expected global and shared exploration progress over time. The shaded regions represent one standard deviation from the mean. maze and urban environments are considerably lower than those in the tunnel networks, indicating that robots generally have more directions of exploration at each junction. CFB alone does not fully capture how environment struc-ture influences the performance of each exploration strat-egy. Two additional factors, map size and communication visibility, play important roles. To account for these, we introduce an encounter probability metric derived from the communication graph. Formally, 

Pencounter = |Ecomm |

 |V |

> 2

 . (6) 

Pencounter measures the probability that any two positions in the map share a communication edge, which serves as a global metric in contrast to the local structure that CFB captures. Importantly, this metric is heavily influenced by map size. The denominator grows as O(|V |2), so larger maps tend to have smaller Pencounter even when many line-of-sight opportunities exist. This scaling is intentional as larger environments reduce the likelihood that two robots will occupy mutually visible positions at the same time, thereby increasing the risk of redundant exploration. In con-trast, smaller environments inherently keep robots in closer proximity, making opportunistic encounters more common. Fig. 6 plots the average CFB value of the top 5% against 

Pencounter for each environment. Although the maze environ-ment exhibits relatively low CFB values, its compact size increases the likelihood of opportunistic encounters between robots. Similarly, the original tunnel environment benefits from its moderate scale and prominent navigation bottle-necks, making it better suited for opportunistic communica-tion. In contrast, the modified tunnel environment, despite having a similar size, is less favorable for opportunistic communication because the added inter-region connections reduce the dependence on a small set of corridors. Finally, the urban environment is the least conducive to opportunistic communication. Its large scale substantially decreases the probability that robots are at nearby locations, while the absence of any bottleneck corridors further reduces the likelihood of encounters. These observations are generally consistent with the re-sults previously discussed in Fig. 3. When comparing MACE to the opportunistic approach, we see that the performance is comparable in the maze and original tunnel environments (only 3.1% and 1.9% mean improvement, respectively). However, in the modified tunnel and urban environments, the mean performance improves by 10.3% and 8.9%, re-spectively, reflecting the implications of larger and more connected environments. While these trends do not mimic the trends in Fig. 3, they suggest that the proposed metrics capture several of the key structural differences between the environments. VI. C ONCLUSION 

In this work, we introduced MACE, a decentralized framework for communication-aware multi-robot exploration that actively incorporates communication-seeking behavior into team coordination. Our results demonstrate that MACE consistently achieves the lowest average exploration time across a set of diverse maps, ranging in size and geom-etry. Furthermore, we highlight the relationship between exploration strategy and environment structure through two graph-based metrics, opening up a promising avenue for improved exploration strategies that are conditioned on the map geometry in real time. Future work includes expanding the simulation environment beyond grid-world experiments to a higher fidelity simulator such as Gazebo. This would enable testing against other state-of-the-art methods, like the pursuit-based M-TARE planner [11]. (a) Maze (b) Tunnels (c) Modified Tunnels (d) Urban 

Fig. 5: Top 5% of edges ranked by current-flow betweenness for each map. 

Fig. 6: Scatter plot of the maps based on suitability for opportunistic exploration. Green arrows indicate the direction that is better suited for opportunistic exploration. REFERENCES [1] L. Ericson, J. Pedro, and P. Jensfelt, “Information gain is not all you need,” in 2025 European Conference on Mobile Robots (ECMR) , 2025, pp. 1–8. [2] A. Dutta, A. Ghosh, and O. P. Kreidl, “Multi-robot informative path planning with continuous connectivity constraints,” in 2019 Interna-tional Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2019, pp. 3245–3251. [3] L. Clark, J. A. Edlund, M. S. Net, T. S. Vaquero, and A.-a. Agha-Mohammadi, “Propem-l: Radio propagation environment modeling and learning for communication-aware multi-robot exploration,” in 

Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems , 2022. [4] F. Amigoni, J. Banfi, and N. Basilico, “Multirobot exploration of communication-restricted environments: A survey,” IEEE Intelligent Systems , vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 48–57, 2017. [5] A. R. Da Silva, L. Chaimowicz, T. C. Silva, and M. A. Hsieh, “Communication-constrained multi-robot exploration with intermittent rendezvous,” in 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelli-gent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 2024, pp. 3490–3497. [6] B. Zhou, H. Xu, and S. Shen, “Racer: Rapid collaborative explo-ration with a decentralized multi-uav system,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 1816–1835, 2023. [7] B. Yamauchi, “A frontier-based approach for autonomous exploration,” in Proceedings 1997 IEEE International Symposium on Computational Intelligence in Robotics and Automation CIRA’97. ’Towards New Computational Principles for Robotics and Automation’ , 1997, pp. 146–151. [8] D. L. da Silva Lubanco, M. Pichler-Scheder, T. Schlechter, M. Scherh¨ aufl, and C. Kastl, “A review of utility and cost functions used in frontier-based exploration algorithms,” in 2020 5th Interna-tional Conference on Robotics and Automation Engineering (ICRAE) ,2020, pp. 187–191. [9] J. Faigl and M. Kulich, “On determination of goal candidates in frontier-based multi-robot exploration,” in 2013 European conference on mobile robots . IEEE, 2013, pp. 210–215. [10] C. Cao, H. Zhu, H. Choset, and J. Zhang, “TARE: A hierarchical framework for efficiently exploring complex 3d environments,” in 

Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , Virtual, July 2021. [11] C. Cao, H. Zhu, Z. Ren, H. Choset, and J. Zhang, “Representation granularity enables time-efficient autonomous exploration in large, complex worlds,” Science Robotics , vol. 8, no. 80, 2023. [12] F. Pratissoli, B. Capelli, and L. Sabattini, “On coverage control for limited range multi-robot systems,” in 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 2022, pp. 9957– 9963. [13] A. Bautin, O. Simonin, and F. Charpillet, “Minpos: A novel frontier allocation algorithm for multi-robot exploration,” in International conference on intelligent robotics and applications . Springer, 2012, pp. 496–508. [14] J. Scherer and B. Rinner, “Multi-robot persistent surveillance with connectivity constraints,” IEEE Access , vol. 8, pp. 15 093–15 109, 2020. [15] Y. Kantaros and M. M. Zavlanos, “Global planning for multi-robot communication networks in complex environments,” IEEE Transac-tions on Robotics , vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 1045–1061, 2016. [16] G. Hollinger and S. Singh, “Multi-robot coordination with periodic connectivity,” in 2010 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation , 2010, pp. 4457–4462. [17] Y. Gao, Y. Wang, X. Zhong, T. Yang, M. Wang, Z. Xu, Y. Wang, Y. Lin, C. Xu, and F. Gao, “Meeting-merging-mission: A multi-robot coordinate framework for large-scale communication-limited explo-ration,” in 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 2022, pp. 13 700–13 707. [18] L. Bramblett, R. Peddi, and N. Bezzo, “Coordinated multi-agent exploration, rendezvous, & task allocation in unknown environments with limited connectivity,” in 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 2022, pp. 12 706–12 712. [19] C. Ho, S. Kim, B. Moon, A. Parandekar, N. Harutyunyan, C. Wang, K. Sycara, G. Best, and S. Scherer, “Mapex: Indoor structure ex-ploration with probabilistic information gain from global map pre-dictions,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2025, pp. 13 074–13 080. [20] F. Cladera, Z. Ravichandran, I. D. Miller, M. Ani Hsieh, C. J. Taylor, and V. Kumar, “Enabling large-scale heterogeneous collaboration with opportunistic communications,” in 2024 IEEE International Confer-ence on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2024, pp. 2610–2616. [21] A. R. da Silva and L. Chaimowicz, “Intermittent rendezvous plans with mixed integer linear program for large-scale multi-robot exploration,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Robotics (ICAR) .IEEE, 2025, pp. 147–154. [22] U. Brandes and D. Fleischer, “Centrality measures based on current flow,” in Annual symposium on theoretical aspects of computer sci-ence . Springer, 2005, pp. 533–544.