Title: Fixed-Haven Reservation for Online Multi-Agent Pickup and Delivery in Dense Warehouses

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.26759v1

Published Time: Fri, 28 Aug 2026 00:47:53 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# Fixed-Haven Reservation for Online Multi-Agent Pickup and Delivery in Dense Warehouses 

# Taisei Hirayama 1, Kohei Yoshida 2, Hiroki Sakaji 1, and Itsuki Noda 1

> 1

Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0808, Japan 

> 2

Toyota Industries Corporation, Aichi 474-8601, Japan hirayama.h77@gmail.com, {sakaji, i.noda }@ist.hokudai.ac.jp 

Abstract 

Dense warehouses often contain single-lane aisles, dead ends, and tree-like guidepaths that leave little room for idle agents to wait without blocking others. Existing Multi-Agent Pickup and Delivery (MAPD) guarantees for completing all finitely released tasks typically rely on extra waiting endpoints that planned paths can avoid, or on biconnected topology; these assumptions may fail in such layouts. We study fixed-Haven reservation for online MAPD, where pickup-delivery tasks are released over time. Each agent owns a fixed Safe Haven (Haven for short), usually its start cell, that only the owner may occupy and that other agents treat as blocked. For fi-nite task releases, we prove that this fixed-Haven contract completes all released tasks under Haven-Reachability and explicit planning/progress assumptions. We implement the contract in SHARP, a Safe-Haven Retreat Planner that keeps every busy or retreating agent on a collision-free reserved route ending at its Haven. We compare SHARP with repre-sentative TP and PIBT-family MAPD baselines: Token Pass-ing (TP), Priority Inheritance with Backtracking (PIBT), and PIBT with Temporary Priority and Temporary Avoidance (PIBTTP-TA) for biconnected main areas with attached trees. In the robustness sweep, SHARP is the only method with 100% success on all tested configurations, at substantially higher centralized planning cost on tree-like layouts. A TP-style fixed-home-return counterfactual with full-route valida-tion also recovers robustness on tested tree-like layouts, sug-gesting that fixed return is a central robustness mechanism there. A no-overwrite variant shows that disabling mid-retreat reassignment worsens service time (release-to-delivery la-tency) by 1.89 × and makespan by 1.53 × in the tested high-load tree condition. 

# 1 Introduction 

Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) asks agents to reach goals without colliding (Stern et al. 2019). Multi-Agent Pickup and Delivery (MAPD) extends this model to online pickup-delivery tasks: tasks are released over time, each task has a pickup and a delivery location, and an assigned agent must visit them in order (Ma et al. 2017, 2019). We focus on the finite task horizon setting, where only finitely many tasks are released. We use complete in this finite-release MAPD sense: every released task is delivered in finite time. Warehouse robot fleets are a canonical MAPD set-ting (Wurman, D’Andrea, and Mountz 2008); there, MAPD is difficult not only because paths must avoid collisions, but also because agents that are waiting, returning, or newly as-signed can block narrow passages. This issue is acute in lay-outs with single-lane aisles, dead ends, or tree-like guide-paths, which arise in warehouse and storage/retrieval ab-stractions (Azadeh, de Koster, and Roy 2017; Roy et al. 2017). In such graphs, a planner needs a place where ev-ery agent can eventually clear the task area without relying on wide detours. Existing MAPD guarantees address this problem through structural assumptions. Token Passing (TP) is complete on well-formed MAPD instances, where agents have enough separate waiting endpoints and paths between endpoints can avoid other endpoints (Ma et al. 2017). Priority Inheritance with Backtracking (PIBT) guarantees reachability on bi-connected graphs, and the Temporary Avoidance variant of PIBT with Temporary Priority (PIBTTP-TA) extends this idea to a biconnected main area with attached trees under additional restrictions (Okumura et al. 2019; Fujitani et al. 2022). These assumptions are valuable, but they do not cover all dense warehouse guidepath graphs. SHARP, a Safe-Haven Retreat Planner, studies a comple-mentary contract. Each agent owns a fixed Safe Haven, nor-mally its start cell; non-owners are not allowed to occupy it. Whenever an agent is executing a task or returning af-ter delivery, SHARP maintains a collision-free reservation from the agent’s current location through any unfinished task waypoint and then back to its Haven. A retreating agent may accept a new task before reaching its Haven, but only if the planner can replace the remaining retreat suffix with a newly validated pickup-delivery-Haven route. The main contribution is a fixed-Haven contract and a finite-release completion guarantee under Haven-Reachability. SHARP is one centralized graph-level im-plementation of this contract: it validates routes with Safe Interval Path Planning (SIPP), keeps owner-only Havens protected, and keeps committed tasks with their assigned agents. We then use experiments to separate three effects: which layout classes the fixed-Haven contract covers against representative baselines, whether a TP-style policy with fixed-home return and full-route validation recovers robust-ness, and how much efficiency comes from allowing mid-retreat reassignment via suffix overwrite. SHARP is a graph-level dispatch-and-routing component for lower-level con-trollers; perception, localization, and continuous control are arXiv:2608.26759v1 [cs.MA] 27 Aug 2026 out of scope. 

# 2 Related Work and Positioning 

2.1 MAPD variants and structural assumptions 

MAPD is online when tasks are revealed over time, and 

offline when the full task set is known in advance (Ma et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2019). The standard MAPD task has two goal locations, pickup and delivery; multi-goal MAPD generalizes this to task sequences with more goals (Xu et al. 2022). Other MAPD variants add oper-ational constraints such as capacity and integrated task-assignment/path-planning decisions (Chen et al. 2021). We study standard online MAPD with finite task releases. TP (Ma et al. 2017) is complete on well-formed MAPD instances. In that definition, endpoints are task locations or separate resting/parking locations: task endpoints are pickup/delivery locations, non-task endpoints are separate waiting locations, there are enough non-task endpoints for the agents, and any two endpoints are connected by a path that avoids all other endpoints. Related well-formed infras-tructure assumptions also appear in online multi-robot tra-jectory planning (Cap, Vokrinek, and Kleiner 2015). This condition is elegant but restrictive when pickup and delivery locations lie on narrow corridors, because those locations become endpoints that paths must avoid. PIBT (Okumura et al. 2019) guarantees reachability on graphs where adjacent vertices lie on cycles, with bicon-nected graphs as the main undirected case. Fujitani et al. (2022) extend the idea to a biconnected main area with at-tached trees via PIBT with Temporary Priority (PIBTTP) and its Temporary Avoidance (TA) variant PIBTTP-TA. The tree extension also comes with task-placement and motion restrictions inside trees. These assumptions differ from well-formedness, but they are still graph-structure assumptions rather than reservation-invariant assumptions. 

2.2 Fallback, parking, and standby 

Several MAPD methods already use the intuition that agents need safe fallback locations. Liu et al. (2019) reserve dummy paths to each agent’s parking location in offline MAPD and note that a parking-avoidance variant of well-formedness is sufficient for their proof. Xu et al. (2022) use dummy endpoints in multi-goal MAPD and may reassign them from an endpoint pool. Yamauchi, Miyashita, and Sug-awara (2022) choose standby nodes dynamically in maze-like few-endpoint environments, and home-location vari-ants have also been studied in multi-item logistics (Farinelli, Contini, and Zorzi 2020; Contini and Farinelli 2021). These are relevant precedents, but SHARP’s contract is different: it protects only fixed owner-only Havens chosen from agent starts, maintains an executable return suffix to the owner’s Haven, and proves completion through quiescent states in which the task area clears. More specifically, SHARP differs in what must be avoided structurally, where fallback cells come from, what invariant is maintained during execution, and how completeness is argued: • only per-agent exclusive Havens, rather than all end-points, are protected; • each Haven is fixed to an agent start cell, so no separate shared fallback pool is required; • every busy agent keeps an executable retreat reservation to its own Haven at all times; and • the proof uses convergence to a quiescent state in which the task area has cleared. Table 1 summarizes the closest explicit fallback con-tracts and completeness-style assumptions. In the remain-der, “fixed-Haven framework” refers to the broader guaran-tee framework, whereas “SHARP” refers to the specific cen-tralized policy studied here. 

TP-family reference points. We use TP-family names carefully. The original TP baseline (Ma et al. 2017) uses endpoint-resting semantics: agents not executing a task wait at endpoints that other planned paths must avoid. 

Token Passing with SIPP and Reservation Table (TP-SIPPwRT) (Ma et al. 2019) replaces TP’s low-level plan-ner with Safe Interval Path Planning with Reservation Ta-ble, but retains TP’s endpoint-resting contract. Token Pass-ing with Task Swaps (TPTS) adds pre-pickup task reassign-ment (Ma et al. 2019); SHARP does not implement that extension and keeps the no-transfer commitment policy for committed tasks. Our TP-home-return and TP-SIPP-home-return baselines are diagnostic counterfactuals. They keep TP’s token order and admissible-task filter, assign each agent a fixed return cell at its start, require current →pickup →delivery →return-cell feasibility before commitment, and force agents away from that cell to return before reconsidering tasks. They are meant to isolate fixed return, not task swaps or a gen-eral TP-family dominance claim. We use home only for the analogous fixed return cell in these TP-style counterfactu-als; Haven denotes SHARP’s invariant-carrying owner-only fallback cell. For SHARP, the listed progress conditions are framework-level assumptions discharged for the concrete policy in Sec-tion 4. 

# 3 SHARP Coordination Framework 

3.1 Setting 

We consider MAPD in discrete time on an undirected graph 

G = ( V, E ), where vertices V are traversable locations and edges E are valid bidirectional moves. For any vertex subset 

S ⊆ V , G[S] denotes the subgraph induced by S. At each timestep t ∈ N0 := {0, 1, 2, . . . }, an agent may either wait at its current vertex or traverse one incident edge. A collision occurs when two agents occupy the same vertex at the same timestep or traverse the same edge in opposite directions si-multaneously. Let A be the set of agents. Let Vtask ⊆ V be the task endpoint candidate set known to the planner. Each task τ

has a pickup location sτ ∈ V , a delivery location gτ ∈ V ,and a release time rτ ∈ N0. Every released task satisfies 

sτ , g τ ∈ Vtask . Before time rτ , task τ is unreleased. Once released, it is pending until committed by the planner, then 

in-progress , and finally completed when its committed agent Table 1: Positioning relative to fallback-based MAPD mechanisms. “Dense endpoints” means pickup/delivery locations may lie on narrow passageways; “parking-limited” means the guarantee can relax endpoint avoidance only through designated parking/dummy endpoints. Abbreviations: onl.=online, offl.=offline, MG=multi-goal MAPD.                     

> Method Setting Fallback target Completeness assumption Fallback cell source Dense endpoints in guarantee Comment TP (Ma et al. 2017) onl. endpoint holding well-formed MAPD non-task endpoints no Complete online MAPD with endpoint-avoidance Liu et al. (2019) offl. designated parking endpoint + dummy path well-formed / parking-avoidance variant designated parking endpoints parking-limited Offline dummy-path feasibility; no online suffix overwrite Xu et al. (2022) MG dummy endpoint from shared endpoint pool well-formed MG-MAPD shared endpoint pool no Goal-sequence paths with dynamic dummy reassignment SHARP onl. exclusive Haven (fixed start cell) Haven-Reachable + finite releases + progress conditions fixed per-agent starts yes Every busy agent keeps a Haven retreat reservation

reaches gτ . For both the theorem and the experiments, visit-ing sτ or gτ completes the corresponding pickup or delivery operation immediately. Deterministic dwell times could be incorporated by adding reserved waits at task vertices, which SIPP can represent through safe intervals, and by enlarging the segment horizons accordingly; that extension is outside the present proof and evaluation. The fixed-Haven policies analyzed here, including SHARP, do not transfer a commit-ted task to another agent; this is an algorithmic commitment policy rather than a restriction on the MAPD input instance. Let pos a(t) be agent a’s position at timestep t.SHARP assigns each agent a ∈ A an exclusive Haven 

η(a) ∈ V , and we write H = η(A) = {η(a) | a ∈ A}.In the fixed-Haven version studied here, the Haven is the agent’s start cell and does not change during execution. The Haven is exclusive to its owner: agent a may occupy η(a),while every other agent treats η(a) as blocked. This owner-only blocking rule is part of the fixed-Haven policy rather than the static instance class defined next. For the proof and algorithm description, each agent is always in exactly one of three coordination states: busy ,

retreating , or idle . A busy agent is executing an assigned task and keeps a reserved path from its current position via pickup and delivery to its Haven. A retreating agent has no unfinished assigned task and follows the remaining reserved suffix from its current position back to its Haven; this suffix may be overwritten if a new task is accepted. An idle agent waits at its Haven with no future reservation outside it. The owner-only Haven rule enforces idle Haven occupancy, so an agent’s own Haven wait does not block its planning. 

3.2 Haven-Reachability 

Definition 1 (Haven-Reachability) . A MAPD instance is 

Haven-Reachable if there exists a task-support region W ⊆

V \ H such that all of the following hold: 1. Task-support connectivity : all task endpoint candidates in Vtask lie in W , and G[W ] is connected. 2. Haven access from the support : for every agent a ∈ A

and every vertex v ∈ W , there exists a simple path from 

v to η(a) whose internal vertices all lie in W .3. Assigned Haven uniqueness : η : A → H is injective, so each assigned Haven has exactly one owner. We call any such W a witness support region. Haven-Reachability is thus a static sufficient condition, not a necessary condition for all task-completing sched-ules. The support region W may be the whole non-Haven traversable region, but it need not include non-Haven ver-tices that are irrelevant to tasks and Haven access. Haven exclusivity is enforced by SHARP’s reservation invariant be-low, not built into G.

Relation to well-formedness. Well-formed MAPD (Ma et al. 2017) requires paths between endpoints that avoid other endpoints. Haven-Reachability protects only the per-agent Havens and does not require a fallback pool sep-arate from the start cells selected as Havens, so dense pickup/delivery vertices may lie on corridors as long as they belong to a connected support region that can reach each Haven. This is related to the parking-avoidance intuition noted by Liu et al. (2019), but SHARP applies it online with owner-only fixed Havens and a reservation invariant. 

Proposition 1 (Haven-Reachability without well-formed-ness) . Haven-Reachability does not imply well-formedness. Proof. Take a path e1 − e2 − e3, attach distinct Havens h1

to e1 and h2 to e3, and let e1, e 2, e 3 be task endpoints. With 

W = {e1, e 2, e 3}, the instance is Haven-Reachable: G[W ]

is connected, every endpoint can reach each Haven through 

W until the final Haven edge, and the Havens have distinct owners. It is not well-formed, because any path from end-point e1 to endpoint e3 passes through endpoint e2.

3.3 Reservation invariant 

SHARP maintains a space-time reservation table R for fu-ture routes of busy and retreating agents, and plans with SIPP (Phillips and Likhachev 2011). Idle Haven occupancy is handled by the owner-only blocking rule rather than by inserting infinite waits into R. SIPP searches time-stamped paths by reasoning over intervals during which each vertex is safe to occupy, while avoiding existing reservations. The crucial invariant is: 

Definition 2 (Safe-Haven Reservation Invariant) . At every timestep: 1. each busy agent reserves a complete collision-free re-maining path from its current position through any unvis-ited task waypoint(s), namely pickup if not yet reached and then delivery, and finally to η(a),2. each retreating agent reserves a collision-free suffix from its current position to its own Haven, 3. reservations contain no vertex or edge-swap conflicts, 4. no agent ever occupies another agent’s Haven, and 5. idle agents remain at their own Havens. Fix a witness support region W for Haven-Reachability. We adopt a per-call relative horizon Tmax for each SIPP in-vocation inside P LAN FULL PATH , measured from the start time of that segment, and set it to satisfy 

Tmax ≥ diam( G[W ]) + 1 ,

where diam( ·) denotes graph diameter. In quiescent con-figurations, this suffices because the pickup →delivery seg-ment lies in G[W ] and each Haven-touching segment needs at most one additional incident edge from W into the Haven. This is a per-segment SIPP bound; outside quies-cence, SHARP retries failed validations while preserving the current retreat reservation. 

3.4 Task assignment and path validation 

SHARP uses a nearest-pickup assignment rule among agents that are idle or currently retreating. In each round, every candidate agent proposes its nearest pending task under the static shortest-path distance dist (·, ·) on the traversable graph. This distance is only a ranking heuristic: it ig-nores time-space reservations and Haven occupancy restric-tions, whereas feasibility is decided only by SIPP valida-tion with all foreign Havens statically blocked for that agent. The algorithm then commits the feasible pair with min-imum pickup distance. Ties can be broken by any fixed total order over agent and task identifiers; the proof does not depend on the particular order. In the pseudocode, SIPP (u, v, t, R, B, T max ) denotes a SIPP search from u to 

v starting at time t with reservations R, blocked vertices B,and per-call horizon Tmax . A RRIVAL TIME (π) returns the fi-nal timestamp of path π, and C ONCAT (π1, π 2, π 3) concate-nates time-consistent path segments while removing dupli-cated boundary states. A candidate assignment is accepted only if SIPP can validate the full path to pickup, delivery, and Haven. For a retreating candidate, this validation tem-porarily removes only that agent’s own future retreat suf-fix from the reservation table; upon commitment, that suf-fix is overwritten by the new full reservation. If validation fails, the agent follows its already reserved retreat path and the assignment can be retried later. In Algorithm 1, C ANDI -

> DATE

RESERVATIONS (R, a ) denotes R with only agent a’s own future retreat suffix temporarily ignored when a is re-treating. This prevents the candidate’s existing retreat reser-vation from being treated as a collision with its own replace-ment route; all other agents’ reservations and all foreign 

Algorithm 1 SHARP (fixed-Haven version)  

> 1:

Initialize t ← 0, R ← ∅  

> 2:

while the run is active do  

> 3:

P ← released pending tasks  

> 4:

I ← idle agents ∪ retreating agents  

> 5:

while I̸ = ∅ and P̸ = ∅ do  

> 6:

c⋆ ← ⊥ ; d⋆ ← ∞  

> 7:

for a ∈ I do  

> 8:

τ ← arg min τ ′∈P dist (pos a(t), s τ ′ ) 

> 9:

Ra ← CANDIDATE RESERVATIONS (R, a ) 

> 10:

(f, π ) ← PLAN FULL PATH (a, τ, Ra, T max ) 

> 11:

if f and dist (pos a(t), s τ ) < d ⋆ then  

> 12:

c⋆ ← (a, τ, π ); d⋆ ← dist (pos a(t), s τ ) 

> 13:

if c⋆ = ⊥ then  

> 14:

break  

> 15:

Unpack (a, τ, π ) ← c⋆ 

> 16:

If a is retreating, remove only a’s future retreat suf-fix from R 

> 17:

Commit π to R, assign τ to a, and mark a busy  

> 18:

Remove a and τ from I and P 

> 19:

Execute one timestep along reserved paths; t ← t + 1 

Algorithm 2 PLAN FULL PATH (a, τ, R, T max ) 

> 1:

tstart ← current timestep  

> 2:

x0 ← pos a(tstart ) 

> 3:

Ba ← H \ { η(a)} 

> 4:

(ok 1, π 1) ← SIPP (x0, s τ , t start , R, B a, T max ) 

> 5:

if ¬ok 1 then  

> 6:

return (false , ∅) 

> 7:

t1 ← ARRIVAL TIME (π1) 

> 8:

(ok 2, π 2) ← SIPP (sτ , g τ , t 1, R, B a, T max ) 

> 9:

if ¬ok 2 then  

> 10:

return (false , ∅) 

> 11:

t2 ← ARRIVAL TIME (π2) 

> 12:

(ok 3, π 3) ← SIPP (gτ , η (a), t 2, R, B a, T max ) 

> 13:

if ¬ok 3 then  

> 14:

return (false , ∅) 

> 15:

return (true , Concat (π1, π 2, π 3)) 

Havens remain blocking constraints. Outside quiescence, this nearest-pickup proposal rule is opportunistic. A candi-date may reject its nearest task even when a farther pend-ing task would validate under the current reservations. This can affect efficiency, but not the finite-release completeness proof, which relies on progress only after quiescence. 

Completeness scope of P LAN FULL PATH . PLAN FULL -PATH is a conservative sequential validator and does not backtrack from an accepted earlier segment. Thus a failed validation outside quiescence does not imply that no feasible route exists; it only means SHARP declines that candidate and preserves the agent’s current retreat reservation. The proof only needs successful validation in quiescent configu-rations, where future reservations outside Havens are empty and each leg can be found independently. 

Proposition 2 (Per-timestep complexity) . Let |P | be the number of pending tasks, CSIPP (Tmax ) the cost of one SIPP call up to horizon Tmax , and Cfull (Tmax ) the cost of one full-path validation, consisting of at most three SIPP calls, each with per-call horizon Tmax . Then SHARP requires 

O min( |A|, |P |) |A|  |P | + Cfull (Tmax ) 

time per timestep, plus distance-precomputation cost. This follows because at most min( |A|, |P |) pairs can be com-mitted per timestep, each round scans up to |A| candidate agents, and each scan performs a nearest-task search over 

|P | pending tasks plus one full-path SIPP validation. 

Thus SHARP trades more centralized planning work for the stronger reservation invariant; Section 5 reports the mea-sured cost. 

# 4 Completeness Under Fixed Havens 

Definition 3 (Finite-release completeness) . A policy is 

finite-release complete under a stated set of assumptions if, whenever only finitely many tasks are released, every re-leased task is delivered in finite time. 

Definition 4 (Quiescent Configuration) . The system is in a 

quiescent configuration at time t if every agent is at its own Haven and no future reservation leaves that Haven. 

Definition 5 (Feasible agent-task pair) . At time t, a pend-ing task τ is feasible for agent a if there exists a finite collision-free reserved route from pos a(t) through sτ and 

gτ to η(a), respecting current reservations and treating all foreign Havens as blocked for a. In SHARP, P LAN FULL -PATH is used as a sufficient validation procedure for such pairs; it is not claimed to be a complete feasibility checker outside quiescent configurations. The SHARP corollary be-low states the extra SIPP horizon condition under which this validator finds the quiescent feasible pairs needed below. 

Definition 6 (Assignment-Progress Property) . A task-assignment strategy satisfies the Assignment-Progress Prop-erty if, whenever at least one feasible agent-task pair exists in a quiescent configuration, the strategy assigns at least one such pair. 

Definition 7 (Route-Execution Progress Condition) . Afixed-Haven execution policy satisfies the Route-Execution Progress Condition if, once no new task is committed after time t, every non-idle agent executes the next reserved state of a finite valid suffix at each timestep until it reaches its Haven; moreover, if the suffix contains committed task way-points, those pickup/delivery waypoints are reached before the final Haven. This rules out failed validations, replanning attempts, or route-overwrite opportunities that defer com-mitted routes through delivery and Haven forever. Corollary 1 below shows that SHARP’s nearest-pickup rule satisfies the Assignment-Progress Property. 

Lemma 1 (Invariant preservation) . SHARP preserves the Safe-Haven Reservation Invariant at every timestep. Proof. Initially, all agents are idle at their Havens. A path is committed only if SIPP validates a collision-free concate-nation ending at the owner’s Haven while treating foreign Havens as blocked, so committed paths preserve Haven ex-clusivity and collision freedom. During execution, agents move only along validated reservations, and once delivery finishes the remaining suffix to Haven becomes the retreat reservation. When a retreating agent accepts a new task, its old suffix is removed only through immediate replacement by another validated full path to the same Haven. Therefore the invariant is preserved inductively. 

Lemma 2 (Feasibility in quiescence) . Assume Haven-Reachability with witness support region W . In quiescence, each pending task is feasible for each agent. Proof. In quiescence, all vertices in W are free in the future because all agents wait at their own Havens. Haven access from the support and undirectedness give a path between the agent’s Haven and each task vertex whose non-Haven ver-tices lie in W ; task-support connectivity connects pickup to delivery inside G[W ]. Concatenating these paths gives a fi-nite route from the agent’s current Haven through pickup and delivery back to its Haven. The route avoids foreign Havens and has no conflicting future reservation. 

Corollary 1 (SHARP satisfies Assignment-Progress) . As-sume Haven-Reachability with witness support region W ,

Tmax ≥ diam( G[W ]) + 1 , and SIPP completeness up to this per-call relative horizon with respect to the reservation table and static foreign-Haven blocking constraints. Then fixed-Haven SHARP’s nearest-pickup assignment rule satis-fies the Assignment-Progress Property. Proof. Consider any quiescent configuration with at least one pending task. Then every agent is idle at its Haven, so in Algorithm 1 we have I = A. By Lemma 2, every pend-ing task is feasible for every agent. For the task selected by each a ∈ I, the pickup →delivery segment has length at most 

diam( G[W ]) , and each Haven-touching segment has length at most diam( G[W ]) + 1 . Since each SIPP call uses hori-zon Tmax from its own segment start time and blocks only foreign Havens, P LAN FULL PATH returns a feasible full path for that selected task. Thus some feasible candidate is gener-ated and c⋆̸ = ⊥. The commitment step therefore commits at least one feasible agent-task pair. Thus the Assignment-Progress Property holds. 

Lemma 3 (Convergence to quiescence under SHARP) . If no further tasks are assigned after some timestep t, then SHARP reaches a quiescent configuration in finite time. Proof. By Lemma 1, every busy or retreating agent already owns a finite collision-free reserved path suffix ending at its Haven. In Algorithm 1, busy agents are never reconsidered for task assignment, and a retreat suffix is overwritten only when a retreating agent accepts a newly validated full path to a new task and back to the same Haven. Therefore, if no fur-ther tasks are assigned after time t, no reserved suffix is over-written after time t. The execution step of Algorithm 1 ex-ecutes the next state of each non-idle agent’s finite reserved suffix at each timestep, so each reaches its Haven in finite time, after which no future reservation leaves it. The role of the framework theorem is to separate the generic progress argument from the graph-structural con-tent. The nontrivial step is supplied by Lemma 2: after qui-escence, Haven-Reachability makes every pending task fea-sible for every Haven owner because the support region is clear and connected. 

Theorem 1 (Finite-release completeness of the fixed-Haven framework) . Assume Haven-Reachability with witness sup-port region W , finitely many task releases, and the no-transfer commitment policy defined in Section 3. Any fixed-Haven policy that maintains the Safe-Haven Reservation Invariant, satisfies the Assignment-Progress Property, and satisfies the Route-Execution Progress Condition is finite-release complete. Proof. Suppose some released task remains unfinished for-ever. A committed task receives, by the invariant, a finite reserved route whose delivery waypoint precedes the fi-nal Haven. Because task releases are finite, each commit-ment consumes one previously pending task, and the no-transfer policy prevents transfer or recommitment of com-mitted tasks, the total number of commitments is finite. Let t⋆ be after the last release and the last commitment. By Route-Execution Progress, every task committed by t⋆

reaches its delivery waypoint in finite time, and all non-idle agents then reach their Havens in finite time. Thus any task that remains unfinished forever must be pending in a quies-cent configuration. Lemma 2 then makes every pending task feasible for every agent, so Assignment-Progress forces an-other commitment, contradicting the choice of t⋆.

Corollary 2 (Finite-release completeness of fixed-Haven SHARP) . Assume Haven-Reachability with witness support region W , finitely many task releases, the no-transfer com-mitment policy defined in Section 3, a per-call relative hori-zon Tmax ≥ diam( G[W ]) + 1 , and SIPP completeness up to that horizon with respect to reservations and static foreign-Haven blocking. Then fixed-Haven SHARP completes every released task in finite time. Proof. Lemma 1 gives the Safe-Haven Reservation Invari-ant, Corollary 1 gives Assignment-Progress, and Lemma 3 gives the Route-Execution Progress Condition for SHARP. The claim follows from Theorem 1. 

# 5 Warehouse-Inspired Experiments 

We report a main robustness sweep plus two targeted diag-nostics: a TP-style fixed-home-return counterfactual and a no-overwrite variant of SHARP. 

5.1 Setup 

We use four map classes (Figure 1): • well-formed (38 × 23 ): the warehouse-style benchmark of Ma et al. (2017), satisfying the endpoint-avoidance condition used by TP; • narrow-bi (38 × 18 ): a biconnected but non-well-formed corridor-shrunk variant;   

> (a) well-formed (b) narrow-bi
> (c) narrow-bi-dead (d) tree

Figure 1: Map classes. Narrow-bi abbreviates narrow-biconnected, and narrow-bi-dead abbreviates narrow-biconnected with dead ends. Orange cells denote start/Haven candidate locations; in a given run only the sampled start cells belong to H. The same sampled start cells are fixed homes for TP-home-return variants. Gray cells are task end-points, white cells are traversable non-task cells, and black cells are obstacles. • narrow-bi-dead (38 × 18 ): the same with depth-1 work-station/staging dead ends, matching the PIBTTP-TA main-area-plus-attached-tree topology; and • tree (45 × 18 ): a tree-like storage abstraction moti-vated by warehouse storage/retrieval and MAPD stud-ies (Azadeh, de Koster, and Roy 2017; Roy et al. 2017; Iida et al. 2023; Hirayama et al. 2025). For each configuration-seed pair, we sample starts/Havens uniformly from orange cells, tasks from the gray task end-point candidates with pickup ̸ = delivery, and reuse the iden-tical instance across compared methods. Unused orange cells remain traversable. In the experiments we use the con-servative witness W = V \ H; for every sampled Haven set we verified Vtask ⊆ W , G[W ] connectivity, Haven access from W , and Haven uniqueness. The main sweep uses agent counts {5, 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , 30 },rates λ ∈ {0.5, 1.0, . . . , 3.0}, 100 runs per configura-tion, and algorithms TP, PIBT, PIBTTP-TA, and SHARP. The home-return sweep uses 30 agents, λ ∈ {1.0, 3.0},well-formed/tree maps, 30 paired seeds, and TP, TP-home-return, TP-SIPP-home-return, and SHARP. For TP-home-return and TP-SIPP-home-return, each agent’s sampled start cell is its fixed home. The no-overwrite variant uses the hard-est tree condition (30 agents, λ = 3 .0), 30 paired seeds, and SHARP with or without mid-retreat overwrite. It keeps full-route validation and a fleet-wide scan over its eligible set, but restricts that set to idle agents: a retreating agent must reach its Haven before accepting another task. The non-well-formed cases stress layouts beyond endpoint-avoidance or biconnectivity assumptions. All sweeps use finite releases at timesteps 0 through 300 inclusive with expected rate λ (ex-pected total 301 λ): each timestep releases ⌊λ⌋ guaranteed tasks plus one extra task with probability λ − ⌊ λ⌋.A run is counted as successful only if all released tasks are delivered before any stop condition is triggered. Runs stop at 10,000 timesteps, 1,000 timesteps without assign-ment/pickup/delivery, or an external 1800 s wall-clock cap; no reported run hit the wall-clock cap. SHARP uses the theorem’s support-region-relative SIPP horizon; with W =

V \ H, the maximum sampled value of diam( G[W ]) + 1 is 67 steps. TP and TP-home-return use TP-style Cooperative A*; TP-SIPP-home-return keeps TP-style token and fixed-home-return policies but uses SIPP; PIBT-family methods do not use SIPP. PIBT-family baselines receive the same released-task stream through a no-transfer MAPD wrap-per: an available agent targets the nearest reachable pending pickup under static distance, commits only when it reaches pickup, and then targets delivery. A provisional pickup tar-get remains pending; if multiple agents target it, the first arrival commits the task and the others reselect. PIBT or PIBTTP-TA supplies the one-step collision-avoidance and priority-inheritance motion policy for those current goals. The 1,000-step stall rule is an experimental watchdog only and is not part of the completeness theorem. TP-SIPPwRT would mainly test a low-level planner substitution under TP’s endpoint-resting contract; our TP-SIPP-home-return variant instead keeps fixed-home return and serves as a di-agnostic, not an exhaustive TP-family replacement. We report success, makespan (completion time of the last delivered task), service time (release-to-delivery latency), per-step runtime, and run-level runtime for counterfactuals; for the no-overwrite variant we also report total travel dis-tance, measured as summed edge traversals over all agents in a successful run. Task metrics are computed over success-ful runs only. For each task metric q (makespan or service time), map m, plotted condition x, and method b, let qm,x,b 

be the successful-run mean. Main-sweep task plots use 

eqm,x,b = qm,x,b 

qref 

> m,q

,

where qref  

> m,q

is the corresponding metric value of the best suc-cessful non-SHARP baseline at the map-specific anchor for that plot family ( λ = 3 .0 for rate sweeps, 5 agents for agent-count sweeps), or SHARP if no non-SHARP baseline suc-ceeds there. These task metrics must be read after condition-ing on success rate. Non-well-formed absolute task metrics are deployment-sensitive, so we report ratios, success, per-step runtime, and planner effort there; absolute task values appear only for the Ma et al. well-formed benchmark. Paired counterfactuals use Friedman tests followed by Bonferroni-corrected Wilcoxon tests, and the no-overwrite variant uses one-sided paired Wilcoxon tests. All methods were imple-mented in Python and evaluated on identical task sequences generated from fixed random seeds on an AMD Threadrip-per PRO workstation with 256 GB RAM. 

Comparison scope. The main sweep is a stress-test com-parison against representative TP and PIBT-family MAPD baselines under our sampled MAPD task distribution, not a theorem-to-theorem dominance claim. SHARP differs from TP-family baselines by fleet-wide candidate evaluation and retreat-suffix overwrite, whereas TP-family methods keep sequential token ordering (Ma et al. 2017, 2019). PIBT and PIBTTP-TA are instead distributed/local-communication methods (Okumura et al. 2019; Fujitani et al. 2022). PIBT-family failures outside their intended graph and task-placement regimes should be read as applicability-boundary evidence. Our PIBTTP-TA implementation fol-lows the temporary-priority and temporary-avoidance mo-tion rules, and the narrow-bi-dead map matches the intended main-area-plus-attached-tree topology, but the sampled task stream is not filtered to exactly satisfy all theorem-side task-placement restrictions of Fujitani et al. (2022). We omit di-rect runtime comparisons to Liu et al. (2019) and Xu et al. (2022), because they study offline or multi-goal variants. 

5.2 Main Sweep: Coordination Robustness and Task Performance 

Figure 2 is the main coordination-robustness result. On the well-formed map, all four methods remain at 100% success on all 36 configurations, consistent with TP’s well-formed guarantee and the empirical robustness of the PIBT-family methods on this benchmark. Off that regime the empirical separation becomes clear: TP degrades on narrow-bi maps, PIBT also loses robustness on narrow-bi-dead maps, and on the tree map SHARP is the only method among the represen-tative main-sweep baselines with 100% success across all tested loads and agent counts. No run hit the external 1800 s wall-clock cap, only nine unsuccessful runs reached the 10,000-timestep horizon, and 9,911 main-sweep runs trig-gered the 1,000-step stall watchdog; the heatmap is therefore not a wall-clock-budget artifact. Figures 3 and 4 complement the success-rate heatmap with normalized task-performance trends. On well-formed and narrow-bi-dead layouts, SHARP remains competitive with the strongest successful baseline despite reserving a return to Haven. On tree layouts, these task metrics are secondary because they are conditioned on successful runs only; the main message there is structural robustness at much higher centralized planning cost. Consequently, tree-layout task ratios should not be read as quality comparisons against failed baselines; they summarize successful-run be-havior after the success-rate result has been considered. 

5.3 TP-Style Fixed-Home-Return Counterfactual 

Tables 2 and 3 isolate the effect of fixed-home return valida-tion. The well-formed absolute values come from the paired 30-seed home-return sweep and therefore differ slightly from the 100-run main-sweep means. On well-formed 30-agent conditions, all methods achieve 100% success and SHARP has the best task metrics. Naive fixed-home re-turn is costly: at λ = 3 .0, TP-home-return more than dou-bles makespan and more than triples service time relative to TP because away-from-home agents must first return be-fore competing. This penalty is not inherent to reserving a return suffix; it comes from the diagnostic TP seman-tics that exclude an away-from-home agent from assign-ment until it has physically reached home. SHARP keeps the Figure 2: Success-rate heatmap for the main sweep. Axes are agent count (x) and task-generation rate λ (y). The map panels move from the common well-formed regime to increasingly restrictive narrow, dead-end, and tree layouts. Among the represen-tative TP and PIBT-family MAPD baselines in the main sweep, only SHARP attains 100% success on all tested configurations. Table 2: TP-style fixed-home-return comparison on Ma et al. well-formed 30-agent conditions (30 paired seeds). Values are absolute means; lower is better except success; runtime is in seconds.                                      

> Well-formed (absolute means)
> λMethod Succ. Makespan Service Runtime 1.0 TP 100.0 370.8 39.1 2.53 TP-home-return 100.0 537.9 120.3 2.42 TP-SIPP-home-return 100.0 538.4 120.3 2.80 SHARP 100.0 349.2 33.0 2.86 3.0 TP 100.0 702.0 180.8 4.53 TP-home-return 100.0 1511.9 579.3 8.81 TP-SIPP-home-return 100.0 1509.9 579.1 10.39 SHARP 100.0 673.5 173.9 7.56

Table 3: Tree subset of the TP-style fixed-home-return com-parison on 30-agent conditions (30 paired seeds). Ratios are normalized to TP-home-return = 1.00; lower is better except success.                                      

> Tree (ratios)
> λMethod Succ. Makespan Service Runtime 1.0 TP 0.0 –––TP-home-return 100.0 1.00 1.00 1.00 TP-SIPP-home-return 100.0 1.01 1.00 1.34 SHARP 100.0 0.79 0.53 20.46 3.0 TP 0.0 –––TP-home-return 100.0 1.00 1.00 1.00 TP-SIPP-home-return 100.0 1.00 1.00 1.31 SHARP 100.0 0.73 0.54 19.04

(a) Vs. task generation rate (30 agents). (b) Vs. number of agents ( λ = 3 .0). 

Figure 3: Normalized service time. Bars show successful-run means, error bars show one standard deviation, and missing bars mean no successful runs. 

(a) Vs. task generation rate (30 agents). (b) Vs. number of agents ( λ = 3 .0). 

Figure 4: Normalized makespan, with the same plotting conventions as Figure 3. fixed-return safety role but evaluates all idle-or-retreating agents and can overwrite a retreat suffix with a newly vali-dated pickup-delivery-Haven route. Friedman tests were sig-nificant in all four map-rate conditions (max observed p-value < 1.7 × 10 −10 ), and all SHARP-versus-home-return comparisons for makespan and service time remained sig-nificant after Bonferroni correction (max observed p-value 

< 1.8 × 10 −6). On tree conditions, TP has no successful runs, both fixed-home-return variants recover 100% success under this TP-style full-route-validation policy, and SHARP further improves normalized makespan/service at substan-tially higher run-level runtime. The no-overwrite variant further separates robustness from efficiency. Table 4 shows the high-load tree result. Both variants retain 100% success, but disabling mid-retreat reassignment worsens all reported task-efficiency and planning-effort ratios; all 30 paired seeds worsen for makespan and service time (one-sided Wilcoxon p =9.31 × 10 −10 ). Because fleet-wide scanning over eligible idle agents is retained, this ablation isolates only the within-Table 4: No-overwrite variant on the high-load tree condition (30 agents, λ = 3 .0, 30 paired seeds). Ratios are normalized to SHARP = 1.00; lower is better except success.                   

> Metric SHARP No-overwrite Success (%) 100 100 Makespan 1.00 1.53 Service time 1.00 1.89 Travel distance 1.00 1.53 ms/step 1.00 1.43 Planner calls 1.00 1.24 Expanded nodes 1.00 1.44 Failed validations 1.00 1.27

SHARP penalty of disabling suffix overwrite; token ordering and non-fleet-wide assignment remain future work. 

5.4 Planning Overhead and Runtime Tradeoff 

Table 5 shows the cost hidden by the success heatmap: tree layouts dominate the search overhead. The fixed-home-Table 5: Representative SHARP planner effort in the main sweep, reported as mean per successful run. Calls are SIPP segment searches, Expanded is the number of expanded SIPP nodes, and Failed is the number of rejected SIPP seg-ment searches rather than failed simulation runs. Smaller values indicate less search effort.                      

> Setting Calls Expanded Failed well-formed 30 agents, λ= 3 .04,201 0.72M 0.75 narrow-bi-dead 30 agents, λ= 3 .04,249 0.84M 102.19 tree 30 agents, λ= 1 .019,530 61.08M 9513.75 tree 30 agents, λ= 3 .056,964 185.98M 27790.61

return counterfactual shows that this is not only a matter of longer return paths: SHARP obtains better tree task ef-ficiency than the TP-style fixed-home-return baselines, but at substantially higher planning cost. In deployments, this layer is most plausible when dispatch is slower than low-level control and optimized SIPP kernels, route caches, and reservation-query indexes exist. 

# 6 Deployment Assumptions and Limitations 

SHARP assumes a centralized fleet manager with a global reservation table and synchronized route execution, so com-parisons to decentralized methods such as PIBT speak pri-marily to structural applicability . The formal guarantee cov-ers fixed exclusive Havens, zero pickup/delivery dwell dura-tion, finitely many task releases, and the fixed-Haven com-mitment model stated in Section 3. Task-swap extensions, deterministic nonzero dwell times, stochastic delays, dy-namic Haven reassignment, or continuous free-space motion without a stable guidepath graph would require additional mechanisms and proofs. Reported runtimes are averages, not per-step tail latencies; deployments with hard dispatch dead-lines would need tail-latency measurement and optimized planning kernels. The TP-home-return and no-overwrite di-agnostics are not exhaustive, and the tree layouts should be read as tree-like storage/retrieval abstractions rather than copied floor plans; broader decompositions across token or-dering, assignment scope, and map classes remain future work. SHARP is therefore most attractive when natural per-agent home cells or docks already exist and the deployment can afford centralized planning. 

# 7 Conclusion 

At the framework level, fixed-Haven reservation provides a finite-release-complete coordination framework under Haven-Reachability and explicit planning/progress assump-tions. At the algorithm level, SHARP realizes this idea by maintaining a retreat reservation to a fixed Haven and, against representative TP and PIBT-family MAPD baselines in the main sweep, attains 100% success on all tested lay-outs. The targeted counterfactual shows that fixed-home re-turn with full-route validation under TP-style semantics is sufficient to recover robustness on the representative tree cases tested here, suggesting that the fixed-return contract is a central robustness mechanism in those conditions. The no-overwrite variant further shows that mid-retreat suffix over-write is not needed for robustness in the tested high-load tree condition, but it is associated with large service-time and makespan gains while fleet-wide scanning over eligible idle agents is retained. SHARP’s algorithmic contribution is therefore to exploit the fixed-return contract more efficiently, while exposing a substantial centralized planning cost. Fu-ture work will relax the fixed-Haven contract, support richer task-duration models, and weaken support-region conditions for partially used guidepath graphs. 

# References 

Azadeh, K.; de Koster, R.; and Roy, D. 2017. Robotized Warehouse Systems: Developments and Research Opportu-nities. Technical Report ERS-2017-009-LIS, Erasmus Re-search Institute of Management. Cap, M.; Vokrinek, J.; and Kleiner, A. 2015. Complete Decentralized Method for On-Line Multi-Robot Trajectory Planning in Well-Formed Infrastructures. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS) , 324–332. Chen, Z.; Alonso-Mora, J.; Bai, X.; Harabor, D. D.; and Stuckey, P. J. 2021. Integrated Task Assignment and Path Planning for Capacitated Multi-Agent Pickup and Delivery. 

IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 6(3): 5816–5823. Contini, A.; and Farinelli, A. 2021. Coordination Ap-proaches for Multi-item Pickup and Delivery in Logistic Scenarios. Robotics and Autonomous Systems , 146: 103871. Farinelli, A.; Contini, A.; and Zorzi, D. 2020. Decentralized Task Assignment for Multi-Item Pickup and Delivery in Lo-gistic Scenarios. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems (AAMAS) , 1843–1845. Fujitani, Y.; Yamauchi, T.; Miyashita, Y.; and Sugawara, T. 2022. Deadlock-Free Method for Multi-Agent Pickup and Delivery Problem Using Priority Inheritance with Tempo-rary Priority. Procedia Computer Science , 207: 1552–1561. Hirayama, T.; Noda, I.; Sakaji, H.; and Kato, N. 2025. Opti-mal Assignment of Immediate Tasks in Multi-agent Pickup and Delivery. In Proceedings of the International Confer-ence on Technologies and Applications of Artificial Intelli-gence (TAAI) , volume 2415, 70–86. Springer, Singapore. Iida, T.; Noda, I.; Kondo, T.; Soda, H.; Ueda, N.; Nawa, M.; and Kato, N. 2023. Negotiation Algorithm for Multi-agent Pickup and Delivery Tasks. In Highlights in Practi-cal Applications of Agents, Multi-Agent Systems, and Cog-nitive Mimetics. The PAAMS Collection. PAAMS 2023 , vol-ume 1838 of Communications in Computer and Information Science , 145–157. Springer, Cham. Liu, M.; Ma, H.; Li, J.; and Koenig, S. 2019. Task and Path Planning for Multi-Agent Pickup and Delivery. In Proceed-ings of the 18th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS) , 1152–1160. Ma, H.; H¨ onig, W.; Kumar, T. K. S.; Ayanian, N.; and Koenig, S. 2019. Lifelong Path Planning with Kinematic Constraints for Multi-Agent Pickup and Delivery. In Pro-ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 33, 7651–7658. Ma, H.; Li, J.; Kumar, T. K. S.; and Koenig, S. 2017. Life-long Multi-Agent Path Finding for Online Pickup and De-livery Tasks. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Au-tonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems (AAMAS) , 837– 845. Okumura, K.; Machida, M.; D´ efago, X.; and Tamura, Y. 2019. Priority Inheritance with Backtracking for Iterative Multi-agent Path Finding. In Proceedings of the 28th Inter-national Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI) ,535–542. Phillips, M.; and Likhachev, M. 2011. SIPP: Safe Inter-val Path Planning for Dynamic Environments. In 2011 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 5628–5635. IEEE. Roy, D.; Krishnamurthy, A.; Heragu, S. S.; and Malmborg, C. 2017. A Multi-Tier Linking Approach to Analyze Perfor-mance of Autonomous Vehicle-Based Storage and Retrieval Systems. Computers & Operations Research , 83: 173–188. Stern, R.; Sturtevant, N.; Felner, A.; Koenig, S.; Ma, H.; Walker, T.; Li, J.; Atzmon, D.; Cohen, L.; Kumar, T. K. S.; Bartak, R.; and Boyarski, E. 2019. Multi-Agent Pathfinding: Definitions, Variants, and Benchmarks. In Proceedings of the 12th International Symposium on Combinatorial Search (SoCS) , 151–159. Wurman, P. R.; D’Andrea, R.; and Mountz, M. 2008. Coor-dinating Hundreds of Cooperative, Autonomous Vehicles in Warehouses. AI Magazine , 29(1): 9–19. Xu, Q.; Li, J.; Koenig, S.; and Ma, H. 2022. Multi-Goal Multi-Agent Pickup and Delivery. In 2022 IEEE/RSJ In-ternational Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 9964–9971. IEEE. Yamauchi, T.; Miyashita, Y.; and Sugawara, T. 2022. Standby-Based Deadlock Avoidance Method for Multi-Agent Pickup and Delivery Tasks. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems (AAMAS) , 1427–1435.